<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 506 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-3-05.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>VI.<br>
 THE MASKS OF SCIENCE.</h4>
 
 <p>
 PHYSICS OR METAPHYSICS?
 </p><p>
 <strong>I</strong>F there is anything on earth like progress,
 Science will some day have to give up, <em>nolens volens</em>,<em>
 </em>such monstrous ideas as her physical, self-guiding <em>laws</em>
 --<em> </em>void of soul and Spirit, -- and then turn to the occult
 teachings.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 507 ACADEMICAL MISNOMERS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 It has done so already, however altered are the title-page and
 revised editions of the Scientific Catechism. It is now over half
 a century since, in comparing modern with ancient thought, it
 has been found that, however different our philosophy may appear
 from that of our ancestors, it is, nevertheless, composed only
 <em>of additions </em>and<em> subtractions </em>taken from the
 old philosophy and <em>transmitted drop by drop through the filter
 of antecedents.</em> 
 </p><p>
 This fact was well known to Faraday, and other eminent men of
 Science. Atoms, Ether, evolution itself -- all comes to modern
 Science from ancient notions, all is based on the conceptions
 of the archaic nations. "Conceptions" for the profane,
 under the shape of allegories; plain truths taught during the
 Initiations to the elect, which truths have been partially divulged
 through Greek writers and have descended to us. This does not
 mean that Occultism has ever had the same views on matter, atoms
 and ether as found in the exotericism of the classical Greek writers.
 Yet, if we believe Mr. Tyndall, even Faraday was an Aristotelean,
 and an Agnostic more than a materialist. In his "Faraday,
 as a Discoverer" (p. 123) the author shows the great physicist
 <em>using </em>"old reflections of Aristotle" which
 are "concisely found in some of his works." Faraday,
 Boscovitch, and all others, however, who see, in the atoms and
 molecules, "centres of force," and in the corresponding
 <em>element force</em>,<em> </em>an ENTITY BY ITSELF, are far
 nearer the truth, perchance, than those, who, denouncing them,
 denounce at the same time the "old corpuscular Pythagorean
 theory" (one, by the way, which has never passed to posterity
 as the great philosopher <i>really </i>taught it), on the ground
 of its "delusion that the conceptual elements of matter <em>can
 be grasped </em>as separate and real entities."
 </p><p>
 The chief and most fatal mistake and fallacy made by Science,
 in the view of the Occultists, lies in the idea of the possibility
 of such a thing as inorganic, or <em>dead </em>matter, in nature.
 Is anything <em>dead</em> or<em> inorganic </em>capable of transformation
 or change? Occultism asks. And is there anything under the sun
 which remains immutable or changeless?
 </p><p>
 This fallacy is nowhere better illustrated than in the scientific
 work of a German <em>savant</em>,<em> </em>Professor Philip Spiller
 (<em>Der Weltaether als Kosmische Kraft</em>)<em>. </em>In this
 cosmological treatise, the author attempts to prove that "no
 material constituent of a body, no atom, <em>is in itself originally
 endowed with force</em>,<em> </em>but that every such atom <em>is
 absolutely dead</em>,<em>* </em>and without any power to act at
 a distance" (p. 4).
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Something <em>dead</em> implies that it had been at some time
 <i>living. </i>When, at what period of cosmogony? Occultism says
 that in all cases when matter <em>appears </em>inert, it is the
 most active. A wooden or a stone block is motionless and impenetrable
 to all intents and purposes. Nevertheless, and <em>de facto</em>,<em>
 </em>its particles are in ceaseless eternal vibration which is
 so rapid that to the physical eye the body seems absolutely devoid
 of motion; [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 508 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This statement, however, does not prevent Spiller from enunciating
 an occult doctrine and principle. He asserts <em>the independent
 substantiality of force</em>,<em> </em>and shows it as an "incorporeal
 stuff" (<em>unkoerperlicher stoff</em>) or substance. Now
 <em>substance </em>is not <em>matter </em>in metaphysics, and
 for argument's sake it may be granted that it is a wrong expression
 to use. But this is due to the poverty of European languages,
 and especially to that of scientific terms. Then this "stuff"
 is identified and connected by Spiller with the aether. Expressed
 in occult language it might be said with more correctness that
 this "force-substance" is the ever-active phenomenal
 <em>positive </em>aether -- <em>prakriti; </em>while the omnipresent
 all pervading ether is the <em>noumenon </em>of the former, the
 substratum of all, or <em>Akasa. </em>Nevertheless, Stallo falls
 foul of Spiller, as he does of the materialists. He is accused
 of "utter disregard of the fundamental correlation of force
 and matter" (of neither of which Science knows anything certain).
 For this "hypostasized half-concept" is, in the view
 of all other physicists, not only <em>imponderable</em>,<em> </em>but
 destitute of cohesive, chemical, thermal, electric, and magnetic
 forces -- of all of which forces -- according to occultism --
 aether is the source and <em>cause.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Therefore Spiller, with all his mistakes, exhibits more intuition
 than any other modern Scientist, with the exception of Dr. Richardson,
 perhaps, the theorist on the "nerve force," or Nervous
 Ether, also on "Sun Force and Earth Force."* For <strong>AE</strong>THER,
 in Esotericism, is the very quintessence of all possible energy,
 and it is certainly to this universal agent (composed of many
 <em>agents</em>)<em> </em>that all the manifestations of energy
 in the material, psychic and spiritual worlds are due.
 </p><p>
 What are Electricity and Light, in fact? How can Science know
 that one is a fluid and the other a "mode of motion"?
 Why is it not made clear why a difference should be made between
 them, since both are considered force-correlations. Electricity
 is a fluid, we are told, immaterial and non-molecular (though
 Helmholtz thinks otherwise), and the proof of it is that we can
 bottle it up, accumulate and store it away. Then, <em>it must
 </em>be simply matter, and no peculiar "fluid." Nor
 is it only "a mode of motion," for motion could hardly
 be stored in a Leyden jar. As for light, it is a still more extraordinary
 "mode of motion;" since, "marvellous as it may
 appear, light (also) can <em>actually be stored up for use</em>,"
 as demonstrated by Professor Grove nearly half a century ago.
 </p><p>
 "Take an engraving which has been kept for some days in the
 dark, expose it to full sunshine -- that is, insulate it for 15
 minutes; lay it on
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] and the spacial distance
 between those particles in their vibratory motion is -- considered
 from another plane of being and perception -- as great as that
 which separates snow flakes or drops of rain. But to physical
 science this will be an absurdity.
 </p><p>
 * See "Popular Science Review," Vol. V., pp. 329-34.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 509 THE FIXING OF LIGHT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 sensitive paper in a dark place, and at the end of 24 hours it
 will have left an impression of itself on the sensitive paper,
 the whites coming out as blacks. . . . There seems to be no limit
 for the reproduction of engravings, etc., etc. . . . ."
 </p><p>
 What is it that remains fixed, nailed, so to say, on the paper?
 It is a<em> Force </em>certainly, that fixed the thing, but what
 is <em>that thing</em>,<em> </em>the residue of which remains
 on the paper?
 </p><p>
 Our learned men will get out of this through some scientific technicality;
 but what is it that is intercepted, so as to imprison a certain
 quantity of it on glass, paper, or wood? Is it "Motion"
 or is it "Force"? Or shall we be told that what remains
 behind is the effect only of the force or Motion? Then what is
 this Force? Force or energy is a quality; but every quality must
 belong to a something, or a somebody. In Physics, Force is defined
 as "that which changes or tends to change any physical relation
 between bodies, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical,
 magnetic, etc." But it is not that "Force" or that
 "Motion" which remains behind on the paper, when the
 Force or Motion has ceased to act; and yet something, which our
 physical senses cannot perceive, has been left there to become
 a cause in its turn and produce effects. What is it? It is not
 matter, as defined by Science -- <em>i.e.</em>, matter in any
 of its known states. An Alchemist would say it was a spiritual
 secretion -- and would be laughed at. But yet, when the physicist
 said that Electricity, stored up, was a fluid, or that light fixed
 on paper is still Sunlight -- this is Science.* In the opinion
 of an experienced Occultist, one who has verified the whole series
 of <em>Nidanas</em>,<em> </em>of causes and effects that finally
 project their last effect on to this our plane of manifestations;
 one who has traced matter back to its noumenon, the explanation
 of the physicist is like calling anger, or its effects -- the
 exclamation provoked by it -- a secretion or a fluid, and man,
 the cause of it -- its<em> material </em>conductor. But, as Grove
 prophetically remarked, that day is fast approaching when it will
 be confessed that the "forces" <i>we</i> know of are
 but the phenomenal manifestations of realities we know nothing
 about, -- but which <em>were known to the ancients and </em>--<em>
 by them worshipped.</em> 
 </p><p>
 He made one still more suggestive remark, however, which ought
 to have become the motto of Science, but has not. Sir W. Grove
 said that "<strong>S</strong>CIENCE SHOULD HAVE NEITHER DESIRES
 NOR PREJUDICES. <strong>T</strong>RUTH SHOULD BE HER SOLE AIM."
 </p><p>
 Meanwhile, in our days, Scientists are more self-opinionated and
 bigoted than even the clergy. For they minister to, if they do
 not actually worship,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The newest Authorities have rejected these explanations as "exploded
 theories," and have now deified "Motion" as their
 sole Idol. But, surely, they and their idol will one day share
 the fate of their predecessors.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 510 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "Force-Matter," which is their <em>Unknown God. </em>And
 how unknown it is may be inferred from the many confessions of
 the most eminent physicists and biologists, with Faraday at their
 head. Not only, he said, could he never presume to pronounce whether
 Force was a property or function of Matter, but he actually did
 not know what was meant by the word <em>matter.</em> 
 </p><p>
 There was a time, he added, when he believed he knew something
 of matter. But the more he lived, and the more carefully he studied
 it, the more he became convinced <em>of his utter ignorance of
 the nature of matter.* </em>(See Buckwell's "Electric Science.")
 </p><p>
 The Occultists are often misunderstood because, for lack of better
 terms, they apply to the essence of Force <em>under certain aspects
 </em>the descriptive epithet of <em>substance. </em>Now the names
 for the varieties of "substance" on different planes
 of perception and being are <em>legion. </em>Eastern Occultism
 has a special appellation for each kind; but Science -- like England,
 in the recollection of a witty Frenchman, blessed with thirty-six
 religions and only one fish-sauce -- has but one name for all,
 namely, "Substance." Moreover, neither the orthodox
 physicists nor their critics seem to be very certain of their
 premises, and are as apt to confuse the effects as they do the
 causes. It is incorrect, for instance, to say, as Stallo does,
 that "matter can no more be realized or conceived as mere
 spacial presence than as a concretion of forces," or that
 "force is nothing without mass, and mass is nothing without
 force" -- for one is the noumenon and the other the phenomenon.
 Again; Schelling, when saying that "It is a mere delusion
 of the phantasy that something, we know not what, remains after
 we have denuded an object of all the predicates belonging to it"**
 -- could never have applied the remark to the realm of transcendental
 metaphysics. It is true that pure force is <em>nothing </em>in
 the world of physics; it is ALL in the domain of Spirit. Says
 Stallo: "If we reduce the mass upon which a given force,
 however small, acts to its limit zero -- or, mathematically expressed,
 until it becomes infinitely small -- the consequence is that the
 velocity of the resulting motion is infinitely great, and that
 the 'thing' . . . is at any given moment neither here nor there,
 but everywhere -- that there is no
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This ominous confession was made, we believe, at a Scientific
 Congress at Swansea. Faraday held a similar opinion, however,
 as stated by Tyndall: "What do we know of the atom <em>apart
 from its </em>force? You imagine a nucleus which may be called
 <em>a</em> and surround it by forces which may be called <em>m</em>;
 to my mind the <em>a</em> or nucleus vanishes and the substance
 consists of the powers <em>m</em>. And, indeed, what notion can
 we form of the nucleus independent of its powers? What thought
 remains on which to hang the imagination of an <i>a </i>independent
 of the acknowledged forces?"
 </p><p>
 ** Schelling, "Ideen," etc., p. 18.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 511 WHAT IS FORCE?</h6>
 
 <p>
 real presence; it is impossible, therefore, to construct matter
 by a synthesis of forces" (p. 161).
 </p><p>
 This may be true in the phenomenal world, inasmuch as the illusive
 reflection of the <em>one reality </em>of the supersensual world
 may appear true to the dwarfed conceptions of a materialist. It
 is absolutely incorrect when the argument is applied to things,
 in what the Kabalists call the supermundane spheres. Inertia,
 so called, "is force" according to Newton (<em>Princ.
 Def. iii.</em>),<em> </em>and for the student of Esoteric Sciences
 the greatest of the occult forces. A body may be considered divorced
 from its relations with other bodies -- which, according to physical
 and mechanical sciences, give rise to its attributes -- only <em>conceptually</em>,<em>
 </em>only on this plane of illusion. In fact, it can never be
 so detached: death itself being unable to detach it from its relation
 with the Universal forces, of which the one <strong>F</strong>ORCE
 or <strong>L</strong>IFE is the synthesis: but simply continues
 such inter-relation on another plane. But what, if Stallo is right,
 can Dr. James Croll mean when, in speaking "On the Transformation
 of Gravity" (<em>Philosophical Magazine</em>,<em> </em>Vol<em>.
 </em>II., p. 252), he brings forward the views advocated by Faraday,
 Waterston, and others? For he says very plainly that gravity --
 </p><p>
 ". . . . . is a force pervading Space <em>external to bodies</em>,<em>
 </em>and that, on the mutual approach of the bodies, the force
 is not increased, as is generally supposed, but the bodies merely
 pass into a place <em>where the force exists with greater intensity</em>.
 . . . ."
 </p><p>
 No one will deny that a force (whether gravity, electricity, or
 any other force) which exists <em>outside </em>of the bodies and
 in open space -- be it ether or vacuum -- must be <em>something</em>,<em>
 </em>and not a pure <em>nothing</em>,<em> </em>when conceived
 apart from a mass? Otherwise it could hardly exist in one place
 with a <em>greater </em>and in another with reduced "intensity."
 G. A. Hirn declares the same in his <em>Theorie Mecanique de l</em>'<em>Univers.
 </em>He tries to demonstrate that the atom of the chemists is
 not an entity of pure convention, or simply an explicative device,
 but that it exists really, that its volume is unalterable, and
 that consequently it is <em>not </em>elastic (!!). "Force,
 therefore, <em>is not in the atom; it is in the space which separates
 the atoms from each other.</em>"
 </p><p>
 The above-cited views, expressed by two men of Science of great
 eminence in their respective countries, show that it is not in
 the least <em>unscientific </em>to speak of the substantiality
 of the so-called <em>Forces. </em>Subject to some future specific
 name, this force is <em>substance </em>of some kind, and can be
 nothing else; and perhaps one day Science will be the first to
 re-adopt the derided name of phlogiston. Whatever may be the future
 name given to it, to maintain that force does <em>not </em>reside
 in the atoms, but only in "space between them," may
 be scientific enough; nevertheless it is not true. To the mind
 of an Occultist it is like saying</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 512 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 that water does not reside in the drops of which the ocean is
 composed, but only in the space between those drops!
 </p><p>
 The objection made that there are two distinct schools of physicists,
 by one of which "the force is assumed to be an <em>independent
 substantial entity</em>,<em> </em>which is NOT a property of matter
 nor is it essentially related to matter,"* is hardly likely
 to help the profane to any clearer understanding. It is, on the
 contrary, still more calculated to throw the question into greater
 confusion than ever. For Force is, then, neither this nor the
 other. By viewing it as "an independent substantial entity,"
 the theory extends the right hand of fellowship to Occultism,
 while the strange contradictory idea that it is not related to
 matter "otherwise than by its power to act upon it,"**
 leads physical science to the most absurd contradictory hypotheses.
 Whether "force" or "motion," (Occultism, seeing
 no difference between the two, never attempts to separate them)
 it cannot act for the adherents of the atomo-mechanical theory
 one way, and for those of the rival school in another way. Nor
 can the atoms be, in one case, <em>absolutely uniform in size
 and weight</em>,<em> </em>and in another, vary in their weight
 (Avogadro's law). For, in the words of the same able critic,
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . "While the absolute equality of the primordial units
 of mass is thus an essential part of the very foundations of the
 mechanical theory, the whole modern Science of chemistry is based
 <i>upon a principle directly subversive of it </i>-- a principle
 of which it has recently been said that 'it holds the same place
 in chemistry that the law of gravitation does in astronomy.'***
 This principle is known as the law of Avogadro or Ampere."****
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This shows that either modern chemistry or modern physics is entirely
 wrong in its respective fundamental principles. For if the assumption
 of atoms of different specific gravities on the basis of the atomic
 theory in physics is deemed absurd, and chemistry meets, nevertheless,
 on its opposite basis (in the question of the formation and transformation
 of chemical compounds) with "<em>unfailing </em>experimental
 verification,"
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Concepts of Modern Physics," xxxi., Introductory
 to the 2nd edition.
 </p><p>
 *<em>* Loc. cit.</em> 
 </p><p>
 *** J. P. Cooke, <em>The New Chemistry</em>,<em> </em>p. 13.
 </p><p>
 **** "It imports that equal volumes of all substances, when
 in the gaseous state, and under like conditions of pressure and
 temperature, contain the same number of molecules -- whence it
 follows that the weights of the molecules are proportional to
 the specific gravities of the gases; that therefore, these being
 different, the weights of the molecules are different also; and
 inasmuch as the molecules of certain elementary substances are
 <em>monatomic </em>(consist of but one atom each) while the molecules
 of various other substances contain the same number of atoms,
 that the ultimate atoms of such substances are of different weights"
 (<em>Concepts of Modern Physics</em>,<em> </em>p. 34). As shown
 further on in the same volume, this cardinal principle of modern
 theoretical chemistry <em>is in utter and irreconcilable conflict
 with the first proposition of the atomo-mechanical theory </em>--<em>
 </em>namely, the absolute equality of the primordial units of
 mass.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 513 THEY AGREE TO DISAGREE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 then it becomes apparent that it is the atomo-mechanical theory
 which is untenable. The explanations of the latter, that "the
 differences of weight are only differences of density, and differences
 of density are differences of distance between the particles contained
 in a given space," are not really valid, because, before
 a physicist can argue in his defence that, "as in the atom
 there is no multiplicity of particles and no void space: hence
 differences of density or weight are impossible in the case of
 atoms," he must first know what an atom is, in reality, and
 that he cannot know. He must bring it under the observation <em>of
 at least one of </em>his physical senses -- and that <em>he cannot
 do: </em>for the simple reason that no one has ever <em>seen</em>,<em>
 smelt</em>,<em> heard</em>,<em> touched </em>or<em> tasted </em>an
 "atom." The atom belongs wholly to the domain of metaphysics.
 It is <em>an entified abstraction </em>--<em> </em>at any rate
 for physical Science -- and has nought to do with physics, strictly
 speaking, as it can never be brought to the test of retort or
 balance. The mechanical conception, therefore, becomes a jumble
 of the most conflicting theories and dilemmas, in the minds of
 the many Scientists who disagree on this, as on other subjects;
 the evolution of which the Eastern Occultist, who follows this
 scientific strife, beholds in the greatest bewilderment.
 </p><p>
 To conclude on the question of gravity. How can Science presume
 to know anything certain of it? How can it maintain its position
 and its hypotheses against those of the Occultists, who see in
 gravity only sympathy and antipathy, or attraction and repulsion,
 caused by physical polarity on our terrestrial plane, and by spiritual
 causes outside of its influence? How can they disagree with the
 Occultists before they agree among themselves? Indeed one hears
 of the conservation of energy, and in the same breath of the perfect
 hardness and inelasticity of the atoms; of the Kinetic theory
 of gases being identical with "potential energy," so
 called; and, at the same time, of the elementary units of mass
 being <em>absolutely hard </em>and<em> inelastic! </em>An Occultist
 opens a scientific work and reads as follows: --
 </p><p>
 "Physical atomism derives all the qualitative properties
 of matter from the forms of atomic motion. <em>The atoms themselves
 remain as elements utterly devoid of property.</em>"<em>
 </em>(Wundt, "<em>Die Theorie der Materie</em>,"<em>
 p. </em>381.)
 </p><p>
 And further:
 </p><p>
 "Chemistry in its ultimate form <em>must be atomic mechanics.</em>"<em>
 </em>(Nazesmann, "<em>Thermochemie</em>,"<em> </em>p.
 150.)
 </p><p>
 And a moment after he is told that:
 </p><p>
 "Gases consist of atoms which <em>behave </em>like solid,
 <em>perfectly elastic </em>spheres." (Kroenig, Clausius,
 Maxwell, etc., <em>Philosophical Magazine</em>,<em> </em>Vol.
 <b>XIX</b>., p. 18.)
 </p><p>
 Finally, to crown all, Sir W. Thomson is found declaring that:
 </p><p>
 "We are forbidden by the modern theory of the conservation
 of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 514 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 energy to assume inelasticity, or anything short <em>of perfect
 elasticity </em>of the ultimate molecules whether of ultra mundane
 or mundane matter." (!!!) ("Philosophical Magazine,"
 p. 321, <em>loc. cit.</em>)
 </p><p>
 But what do the men of <em>true </em>Science say to all this?
 By the "men of true Science" we mean those who care
 too much for truth and too little for their personal vanity to
 dogmatise on anything, as the majority do. There are several among
 them -- perhaps more than dare publish openly their secret conclusions
 for fear of the cry "Stone him to death!" -- men, whose
 intuitions have made them span the abyss that lies between the
 terrestrial aspect of matter, and the -- to us, on our plane of
 illusion -- subjective, <em>i.e.</em>, TRANSCENDENTALLY OBJECTIVE
 SUBSTANCE, and led them to proclaim the existence of the latter.
 Matter, to the Occultist, it must be remembered, is that totality
 of <em>existences </em>in the Kosmos, which falls within any of
 the planes of possible perception. We are but too well aware that
 the orthodox theories of sound, heat and light, are against the
 occult doctrines. But, it is not enough for the men of Science,
 or their defenders, to say that <em>they do not deny dynamic power
 to light and heat; </em>and urge as a proof the fact that Mr.
 Crookes' radiometer has unsettled no views. If they would fathom
 the ultimate nature of these Forces, they have first to admit
 their <em>substantial </em>nature, however <em>supersensuous.
 </em>Neither do the Occultists deny the correctness of the vibratory
 theory.* Only they limit its functions to our Earth -- declaring
 its inadequacy on other planes than ours, since "Masters"
 in the Occult Sciences perceive the CAUSES that produce ethereal
 vibrations. Were all these only the fictions of the alchemists,
 or dreams of the Mystics, such men as Paracelsus, Philalethes,
 Van Helmont, and so many others, would have to be regarded as
 worse than visionaries: they would become impostors and deliberate
 mystificators.
 </p><p>
 The Occultists are taken to task for calling the <em>Cause </em>of
 light, heat, sound, cohesion, magnetism, etc., etc., a <em>substance</em>.**
 Mr. Clerk Maxwell has stated that the pressure of strong sunlight
 on a square mile is about 3 1/4 lbs. It is, they are told, "the
 energy of the myriad ether waves;" and when they call it
 a "substance" impinging on that area, their explanation
 is proclaimed <em>unscientific.</em> 
 </p><p>
 There is no justification for such an accusation. In no way --
 as stated
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Referring to the <i>Aura</i>, one of the Masters says in the
 "Occult World," "How could you make yourself understood
 by, command in fact, those semi-intelligent <em>forces</em>,<em>
 </em>whose means of communication with us are not through spoken
 words but <em>through sounds and colours </em>in correlation between
 the <em>vibrations </em>of the two." It is this "correlation"
 that is unknown to modern Science, yet was many times explained
 by the Alchemists.
 </p><p>
 ** The "substance" of the Occultist, however, is to
 the most refined <em>substance </em>of the physicist, what <em>radiant
 matter </em>is to the leather of the Chemist's boots.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 515 THE MYSTIC RAYS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 more than once before now -- do the Occultists dispute the explanations
 of Science, as affording a solution of the <em>immediate </em>objective
 agencies at work. Science only errs in believing that, because
 it has detected in vibratory waves the <em>proximate </em>cause
 of these phenomena, it has, therefore, revealed ALL that lies
 beyond the threshold of Sense. It merely traces the sequence of
 phenomena on a plane of effects, illusory projections from the
 region that Occultism has long since penetrated. And the latter
 maintains that those etheric tremors, are not, as asserted by
 Science, set up by the vibrations of the molecules of <em>known
 </em>bodies -- the matter of our terrestrial objective consciousness,
 -- but that we must seek for the ultimate causes of light, heat,
 etc., etc., in <b>MATTER </b>existing in <em>super</em>-<em>sensuous
 </em>states<em> </em>--<em> </em>states, however, as fully objective
 to the spiritual eye of man, as a horse or a tree is to the ordinary
 mortal. Light and heat are the ghost or shadow of matter in motion.
 Such states can be perceived by the SEER or the Adept during the
 hours of trance, under the <em>Sushumna ray </em>--<em> </em>the
 first of the Seven <em>Mystic </em>rays of the Sun.*
 </p><p>
 Thus, we put forward the Occult teaching which maintains the reality
 of a supersubstantial and supersensible essence of that <em>Akasa
 </em>(not ether, which is only an aspect of the latter), the nature
 of which cannot be inferred from its remoter manifestations --
 <em>its merely phenomenal phalanx of effects </em>--<em> </em>on
 this terrene plane. Science, on the contrary, informs us that
 heat can never be regarded as matter in any conceivable state.**
 We are also told that the two great obstacles to the fluid (?)
 theory of heat undoubtedly are: --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The names of the Seven Rays -- which are, Sushumna, Harikesa,
 Viswakarman, Viswatryarchas, Sannaddha, Sarvavasu and Swaraj --
 are all mystical, and each has its distinct application in a distinct
 state of consciousness, for occult purposes. The <em>Sushumna</em>,
 which, as said in the <em>Nirukta </em>(11, 6), is only to light
 up the moon, is the ray nevertheless cherished by the initiated
 Yogis. The totality of the Seven Rays spread through the Solar
 system constitute, so to say, the physical <em>Upadhi </em>(basis)
 of the <em>Ether of Science; </em>in which Upadhi, light, heat,
 electricity, etc., etc., -- the forces of orthodox science --
 correlate to produce their terrestrial effects. As psychic and
 spiritual effects, they emanate from, and have their origin in,
 the supra-solar Upadhi, in the ether of the Occultist -- or Akasa.
 </p><p>
 ** To cite a most impartial critic, one whose authority no one
 can call in question, as a reminder to Western Dogmatists, that
 the question cannot be in any way considered as settled: "There
 is no fundamental difference between light and heat . . . each
 is merely a metamorphosis of the other. . . . Heat is light in
 complete repose. Light is heat in rapid motion. Directly light
 is combined with a body, it becomes heat; but when it is thrown
 off from that body it again becomes light." (<em>Leslie</em>'<em>s
 Fluid Theory of Light and Heat.</em>)<em> </em>"<em>Whether
 this is true or false we cannot tell</em>,<em> </em>and many years,
 perhaps many generations, will have to elapse before we shall
 be able to tell." (<em>Buckle</em>'<em>s History of Civilization</em>,<em>
 </em>Vol. III., p. 384.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 516 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (1.) The production of heat by friction -- excitation of molecular
 motions.
 </p><p>
 (2.) The conversion of heat into mechanical motion.
 </p><p>
 The answer given is: There are fluids of various kinds. Electricity
 is called a fluid, and so was heat quite recently, but it was
 on the supposition that heat was some imponderable substance.
 This was during the supreme and autocratic reign of matter. When
 the latter was dethroned, and MOTION was proclaimed the sole sovereign
 ruler of the Universe, heat became "a mode of motion."
 We need not despair: it may become something else to-morrow. Like
 the Universe itself, Science is ever <em>becoming</em>,<em> </em>and
 can never say, "I am that I am." On the other hand,
 Occult Science has its <em>changeless </em>traditions from prehistoric
 times. It may err in particulars; it can never become guilty of
 a mistake in questions of Universal laws, simply because that
 Science, justly referred to by philosophy as the "<em>divine</em>,"<em>
 </em>was born on higher planes, and was brought on Earth by beings
 who were wiser than man will be, even in the seventh Race of his
 Seventh Round. And <em>that </em>Science maintains that Forces
 are not what modern learning would have them; <em>e.g.</em>,<em>
 </em>Magnetism is <em>not </em>a "mode of motion"; and,
 in this particular case, at least, <em>exact </em>"modern
 Science" is sure to come to grief some day. Nothing, at the
 first blush, can appear more ridiculous, more outrageously absurd
 than to say, for instance: "the Hindu initiated Yogi knows
 really <em>ten times more than the greatest European physicist
 of the ultimate nature and constitution of light </em>--<em> </em>both
 solar and lunar." Yet why is the Sushumna ray believed to
 be that ray which furnishes the moon with its borrowed light?
 Why is it "the ray cherished <em>by the initiated Yogi?</em>"<em>
 </em>Why is the moon held as the <em>deity of the mind</em>,<em>
 </em>by those Yogis? We say, because light, or rather all its
 occult properties, every combination and correlation of it with
 other forces, mental, psychic, and spiritual, were perfectly known
 to the old adepts.
 </p><p>
 Therefore, although, in its knowledge of the ultimate constitution
 of matter, or in the so-called ultimate analysis as opposed to
 the proximate in chemistry, occult science may be less well-informed
 as to the behaviour of compound elements in various cases of physical
 correlations: still, it is immeasurably higher in its knowledge
 of the ultimate occult states of matter, and of the true nature
 of matter, than all the physicists and chemists of our modern
 day put together.
 </p><p>
 Now, if we state the truth openly and in full sincerity, namely,
 that the ancient Initiates had a far wider knowledge of physics
 -- as a Science of Nature -- than our Academies of Science, all
 taken together, possess, the statement will be characterized as
 an impertinence and an absurdity; for physical sciences are considered
 to have been carried in our age to the apex of perfection. Hence,
 the twitting query -- "Can</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 517 THE CAUSES AND THE EFFECTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Occultists meet successfully the two points, namely (<em>a</em>)
 the production of heat by friction -- excitation of molecular
 motions; and (<em>b</em>) the conversion of heat into mechanical
 force, if they hold to the old "exploded" theory of
 heat being a substance or a fluid?"
 </p><p>
 To answer the question, it must first be observed that the Occult
 Sciences do not regard either electricity or any of the forces
 supposed to be generated by it, as matter, <em>in any of the states
 known to physical Science; </em>to put it more clearly, none of
 these "forces," so-called, are either solids, gases,
 or fluids. If it did not look pedantic, an Occultist would even
 object to electricity being called a fluid --<em> as it is an
 effect and not a cause. </em>But its <em>noumenon</em>,<em> </em>he
 would say, <em>is a conscious cause. </em>The same in the cases
 of "Force" and the "Atom." Let us see what
 an eminent Academician, Butlerof, the chemist, had to say about
 these two abstractions.
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 "What is Force?" argues this great man of Science, "what
 is it from a strictly scientific stand-point, and as warranted
 by the law of conservation of energy? Conceptions of Force are
 resumed by our conceptions of this, that, or another mode of motion."
 Force is thus simply the passage of <em>one state of motion into
 another state of the same: </em>of electricity, into heat and
 light, of heat into sound or some mechanical function, and so
 on.* The first time electric fluid was produced by man on earth
 it must have been by friction; hence, as well-known, it is heat
 that produces it by disturbing its <em>laya </em>state,** and
 electricity exists no more on earth <em>per se </em>than heat
 or light, or any other force. They are all correlations, as science
 says. "When a given quantity of heat, assisted by a steam
 engine, is transformed into mechanical work, we speak of steam
 power (or force). When a falling body strikes an obstacle in its
 way, thereby generating heat and sound -- we call it the power
 of collision. When electricity decomposes water or heats a platinum
 wire, we speak of the force of the electric fluid. When the rays
 of the sun are intercepted by the thermometer bulb and its quicksilver
 expands, we speak of the calorific energy of the sun. In short,
 when one state of a determined quantity of motion ceases, another
 state of motion equivalent to the preceding takes its place, and
 the result of such a transformation or correlation is -- force.
 In all cases where such a transformation, or the passage of one
 state of motion into another, is entirely absent, there no force
 is possible. Let us admit for a moment an absolutely homogeneous
 state of the Universe, and our conception of force falls down
 to nought."
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * On the plane of manifestation and illusionary matter it may
 be so; not that it is nothing more, for it is vastly more.
 </p><p>
 ** Neutral, or zero.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 518 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "Therefore it becomes evident that the force, which materialism
 considers as the cause of the diversity that surrounds us, is
 in sober reality only an effect, a result of that diversity. From
 such point of view force is not the cause of motion, but a result,
 while the cause of that force, or forces, is not the substance
 or matter, but motion itself. Matter thus must be laid aside and
 with it the basic principle of materialism, which has become unnecessary,
 as force brought down to a state of motion can give no idea of
 the substance. If force is the result of motion, then it becomes
 incomprehensible <em>why that motion should become witness to
 matter </em>and not to Spirit or a Spiritual essence. True, our
 reason cannot conceive of a motion minus something moving (and
 our reason is right); but the nature or <em>esse </em>of that
 something moving remains to Science entirely unknown; and the
 Spiritualist, in such case, has as much right to attribute it
 to a "Spirit," as a Materialist to creative and all-potential
 matter. A Materialist has no special privileges in this instance,
 nor can he claim any. The law of the conservation of energy, as
 thus seen, is shown to be illegitimate in its pretensions and
 claims in this case. The "great dogma" -- <em>no force
 without matter and no matter without force </em>--<em> </em>falls
 to the ground, and loses entirely the solemn significance with
 which materialism has tried to invest it. The conception of force
 still gives no idea of matter and compels us in no way to see
 in it "the origin of all origins." ("<em>Scientific
 Letters</em>,"<em> Professor Butlerof.</em>)
 </p><p>
 We are assured that real science is not materialistic; and our
 own conviction tells us that it cannot be so, when its learning
 is real. There is a good reason for it, well defined by some physicists
 and chemists themselves. Natural sciences <em>cannot </em>go hand
 in hand with materialism. To be at the height of their calling,
 men of science have to reject the very possibility of materialistic
 doctrines having aught to do with the <em>atomic </em>theory;
 and we find that Lange, Butlerof, Du Bois Reymond, -- the latter
 probably unconsciously -- and several others, have proved it.
 And it is, furthermore, demonstrated by the fact, that Kanada
 in India, and Leucippus, Democritus, and after them Epicurus --
 the earliest atomists in Europe -- while propagating their doctrine
 of definite proportions, believed in <em>Gods </em>or supersensuous
 entities, at the same time. Their ideas upon matter thus differed
 from those now prevalent. We must be allowed to make our statement
 clearer in a short synopsis of the ancient and modern views of
 philosophy upon atoms, and thus prove that the atomic theory kills
 Materialism.
 </p><p>
 From the standpoint of Materialism, which reduces the beginnings
 of all to <em>matter</em>,<em> </em>the Universe consists, in
 its fullness, of atoms and vacuity. Even leaving aside the axiom
 -- now absolutely demonstrated by telescope and microscope --
 taught by the ancients, that nature abhors</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 519 THE VICIOUS CIRCLE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 vacuum, what is an atom? "It is, we are answered by Science,"
 writes Professor Butlerof, "the limited division of substance,
 the indivisible particle of matter. To admit the divisibility
 of the atom, amounts to an admission of an infinite divisibility
 of substance, which is equivalent to reducing substance to <em>nihil</em>,<em>
 </em>a nothingness. Owing to a feeling of self-preservation alone,
 materialism cannot admit infinite divisibility; otherwise, it
 would have to bid farewell for ever to its basic principle and
 thus sign its own death-warrant." Buchner, for instance,
 like a true dogmatist in materialism, declares that "to accept
 infinite divisibility is absurd, and amounts to doubting the very
 existence of matter." The Atom is indivisible then, saith
 Materialism? Very well.
 </p><blockquote>
 "See now what a curious contradiction this fundamental principle
 of the materialists is leading them into," writes Butlerof.
 "The atom is <i>indivisible</i>,<i> </i>and at the same time
 we know it to be <i>elastic. </i>An attempt to deprive it of elasticity
 is unthinkable; it would amount to an absurdity. <i>Absolutely
 non</i>-<i>elastic atoms could never exhibit a single one of those
 numerous phenomena that are attributed to their correlations.
 </i>Without any elasticity, the atoms could not manifest their
 energy, and the substance of the materialists would remain weeded
 of every force. Therefore, if the Universe is composed of atoms,
 then those atoms <i>must be elastic. </i>It is here that we meet
 with an insuperable obstacle. For, what are the conditions requisite
 for the manifestation of elasticity? An elastic ball, when striking
 against an obstacle, is flattened and contracts, which it would
 be impossible for it to do, were not that ball to consist of particles,
 the relative position of which experiences at the time of the
 blow a temporary change. This may be said of elasticity in general;
 no elasticity is possible without change with respect to the position
 of the compound particles of an elastic body. This means that
 the elastic body is changeful and consists of particles, or, in
 other words, that elasticity can pertain <i>only to those bodies
 that are divisible. </i>And the atom <i>is</i> elastic."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This is sufficient to show how absurd are the simultaneous admissions
 of the non-divisibility and elasticity of the atom. The atom <em>is
 </em>elastic,<em> ergo</em>,<em> </em>the atom is divisible, and
 must consist of particles, or of <em>sub</em>-atoms. And these
 <em>sub</em>-atoms? They are either non-elastic, and in such case
 they represent no dynamic importance, or, they are <em>elastic
 </em>also; and in that case, they, too, are subject to divisibility.
 And thus <em>ad infinitum. </em>But infinite divisibility of atoms
 resolves matter into simple centres of force, <em>i.e.</em>, precludes
 the possibility of conceiving matter as an <em>objective </em>substance.
 </p><p>
 This vicious circle is fatal to materialism. It finds itself caught
 in its own nets, and no issue is possible for it out of the dilemma.
 If it says that the atom is indivisible, then it will have mechanics
 asking it the awkward question: "How does the Universe move
 in this case, and how do its forces correlate? A world built on
 absolutely <i>non</i>-elastic atoms, is like an engine without
 steam, it is doomed to eternal inertia."*
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Scientific Letters," Butlerof.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 520 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Accept the explanations and teachings of Occultism, and, the blind
 inertia of physical Science being replaced by the <em>intelligent
 active </em>Powers behind the veil of matter, motion and inertia
 become subservient to those Powers. It is on the doctrine of the
 illusive nature of matter, and the infinite divisibility of the
 atom, that the whole science of Occultism is built. It opens limitless
 horizons to <em>substance </em>informed by the divine breath of
 its soul in every possible state of tenuity, states still undreamt
 of by the most spiritually disposed chemists and physicists.
 </p><p>
 The above views were enunciated by an Academician, the greatest
 chemist in Russia, and a recognised authority even in Europe --
 the late Professor Butlerof. True, he was defending the phenomena
 of the Spiritualists, the materializations, so called, in which
 he believed as Professors Zollner, and Hare did, as Mr. A. Russell
 Wallace, Mr. W. Crookes, and many another Fellow of the Royal
 Society, do still, whether openly or secretly. But his argument
 with regard to the nature of the essence that acts behind the
 physical phenomena of light, heat, electricity, etc., is no less
 scientific and authoritative for all that, and apply admirably
 to the case in hand. Science has no right to deny to the Occultists
 their claim to a more profound knowledge of the so-called Forces;
 which, they say, are only the effects of causes generated by Powers,
 substantial, yet supersensuous, and <em>beyond </em>any kind of
 matter with which they (the Scientists) have hitherto become acquainted.
 The most science can do is to assume the attitude of agnosticism
 and to maintain it. Then it can say: "Your case is no more
 proven than is ours; but we confess to knowing nothing in reality
 either about Force or matter, or that which lies at the bottom
 of the so-called correlations of Forces. Therefore, time alone
 can prove who is right and who is wrong. Let us wait patiently,
 and meanwhile show courtesy instead of scoffing at each other."
 </p><p>
 But to do this requires a boundless love of truth and the surrender
 of that prestige -- however false -- of <em>infallibility</em>,<em>
 </em>which the men of Science have acquired among the ignorant
 and flippant, though cultured, masses of the profane. To blend
 the two sciences, the archaic and the modern, requires first of
 all the abandonment of the actual materialistic lines. It necessitates
 a kind of religious mysticism and even the study of old magic,
 which our Academicians will never take up. The necessity is easily
 explained. Just as in old alchemical works the real meaning of
 the substances and elements meant are concealed under the most
 ridiculous metaphors, so are the physical, psychic, and spiritual
 natures of the Elements (say of fire) concealed in the Vedas,
 and especially in the Puranas, under allegories comprehensible
 only to the Initiates. Had they no meaning, then indeed all those
 long legends and allegories about the sacredness of the three
 types of fire, and the <em>forty</em>-<em>nine original fires</em>
 --</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 521 CHEMICAL GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 personified by the Sons of Daksha's daughters and the Rishis,
 their husbands, "who with the first son of Brahma and his
 three descendants constitute the forty-nine fires" -- would
 be idiotic verbiage and no more. But it is not so. Every <em>fire</em>
 has a distinct function and meaning in the worlds of the physical
 and the spiritual. It has, moreover, in its <em>essential </em>nature
 a corresponding relation to one of the human psychic faculties,
 besides its well determined chemical and physical potencies when
 coming in contact with the <em>terrestrially </em>differentiated
 matter. Science has no speculations to offer upon fire <em>per
 se; </em>Occultism and ancient religious science have. This is
 shown even in the meagre and purposely veiled phraseology of the
 Puranas, where (as in the <em>Vayu Purana</em>)<em> </em>many
 of the qualities of the <em>personified </em>fires are explained.
 Thus, <em>Pavaka </em>is electric, or <em>Vaidyuta</em>,<em> </em>fire;
 Pavamana, <em>the fire produced by friction</em>,<em> </em>(or<em>
 Nirmathya</em>)<em>: </em>and <em>Suchi </em>is solar (or <em>Saura</em>)<em>
 </em>fire<em>* </em>-- all these three being the sons of Abhimanin,
 the Agni (fire), eldest son of Brahma and of Swaha. Pavaka, moreover,
 is made parent to Kavyavahana, <em>the fire of the Pitris: </em>Suchi
 to Havyavahana -- the fire of the gods; and Pavamana, to Saharaksha,
 the fire of the Asuras. Now all this shows that the writers of
 the Puranas were perfectly conversant with the "Forces"
 of Science and their correlations; moreover, with the various
 qualities of the latter in their bearing upon those psychic and
 physical phenomena which receive no credit and are unknown to
 physical science now. Very naturally, when an Orientalist, --
 especially one with materialistic tendencies -- reads that these
 are only appellations of fire employed <em>in the invocations
 </em>and rituals, he calls this "Tantrika superstition and
 mystification"; and he becomes more careful to avoid errors
 in spelling, than to give attention to the secret meaning attached
 to the personifications, or to seek their explanation in the physical
 correlations of forces, so far as known. So little credit, indeed,
 is given to the ancient Aryans for knowledge, that even such glaring
 passages as in <em>Book I. chap. </em>ii,<em> Vishnu Purana</em>,<em>
 </em>are left without any notice. Nevertheless, what can this
 sentence mean? -- "Then Ether, air, light, water, and earth,
 severally united with the properties of sound and other qualities,
 existed as distinguishable according to their properties, . .
 . . but possessing many and various energies and being unconnected,
 they <em>could not</em>,<em> without combination</em>,<em> </em>create
 living beings, not having blended with each other. . . . Having
 combined . . . they assumed through mutual association, the character
 of one mass of entire unity; and directed by Spirit . . ."
 etc. This means, of course, that the writers were perfectly acquainted
 with correlation and were well posted about the origin of Kosmos
 from the "undiscrete Principle" -- <em>Avyaktanugrahena</em>,<em>
 </em>as applied
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Called the "drinker of waters," solar heat causing
 water to evaporate.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 522 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 to Parabrahmam and Mulaprakriti conjointly, and not to "Avyakta,
 <em>either </em>First Cause, or matter," as Wilson gives
 it. The old Initiates knew of no "miraculous creation,"
 but taught the evolution of atoms (on our physical plane), and
 their first differentiation from <em>laya </em>into the <em>protyle</em>,<em>
 </em>as Mr. Crookes has suggestively named matter, or primordial
 substance <em>beyond </em>the zero-line: -- there where we place
 <em>Mulaprakriti</em>,<em> </em>the "<i>root</i>-Principle"
 of the world stuff and of all in the world.
 </p><p>
 This can be easily demonstrated. Take, for instance, the newly-published
 catechism of the <em>Visishtadwaita Vedantins</em>,<em> </em>an
 orthodox and exoteric system, yet fully enunciated and taught
 in the XIth century (its founder, Ramanujacharya, being born in
 <b>A.D.</b> 1017), at a time when European "Science"
 still believed in the squareness and flatness of the Earth, of
 Cosmas-Indicopleustes of the VIth century. It teaches that before
 evolution began, Prakriti (Nature) was in a condition of <em>laya
 </em>or absolute homogeneity, as "matter exists in two conditions,
 the <em>sukshma</em>,<em> </em>or latent and undifferentiated,
 and the <em>sthula </em>or differentiated condition." Then
 it became <em>anu</em>, atomic. It teaches of <em>Sudda</em>-<em>satwa
 </em>-- "a substance not subject to the qualities of matter,
 from which it is quite different," and adds that out of that
 substance the bodies of the inhabitants of Vaikuntaloka (the heaven
 of Vishnu), the gods, are formed. That every particle or atom
 of Prakriti contains <em>Jiva</em> (divine life), and is the <em>sarira
 </em>(body) of that Jiva which it contains, while every Jiva is
 in its turn the <em>sarira </em>of the supreme spirit, as "Parabrahm
 pervades every Jiva, as well as every particle of matter."
 Dualistic and anthropomorphic as may be the philosophy of the
 Visishtadwaita, when compared with that of the <em>Adwaita</em>
 -- the non-dualists, -- it is yet supremely higher in logic and
 philosophy than the cosmogony accepted by either Christianity,
 or its great opponent, modern Science. The followers of one of
 the greatest minds that ever appeared on Earth, the <em>Adwaita
 </em>Vedantins are called <em>Atheists</em>,<em> </em>because
 they regard all save Parabrahm, the <em>secondless</em>,<em> </em>or
 Absolute Reality -- as an illusion. Yet the wisest Initiates came
 from their ranks, as also the greatest Yogis. The<em> Upanishads
 </em>show that they most assuredly knew not only what is the <em>causal
 </em>substance in the <em>effects </em>of<em> friction</em>,<em>
 </em>and that their forefathers were acquainted with the <em>conversion
 of heat into mechanical force</em>,<em> </em>but that they were
 acquainted with the <em>noumena </em>of every spiritual as well
 as of every cosmic phenomenon.
 </p><p>
 Truly the young Brahmin who graduates in the universities and
 colleges of India with the highest honours; who starts in life
 as an <b>M.A</b>. and an <b>LL.B.</b>, with a tail initialed from
 Alpha to Omega after his name, and a contempt for his national
 gods proportioned to the honours received in his education in
 physical sciences; truly he has but to read in the light of the
 latter, and with an eye to the correlation of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 523 SUGGESTIVE ALLEGORIES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 physical Forces, certain passages in his Puranas, if he would
 learn how much more his ancestors knew than he will ever know
 -- unless he becomes an occultist. Let him turn to the allegory
 of Pururavas and the celestial <em>Gandharva</em>,<em>* </em>who
 furnished the former with a vessel full of heavenly fire. The
 primeval mode of obtaining fire by friction has its scientific
 explanation in the Vedas, and is pregnant with meaning for him
 who reads between the lines. The <em>Tretagni </em>(sacred triad
 of fires) obtained by the attrition of sticks made of the wood
 of the <em>Aswattha </em>tree (the Bo-tree, of Wisdom and Knowledge)
 -- sticks "as many finger-breaths long as there are syllables
 in the gayatri" must have a secret meaning, or else the writers
 of the Vedas and Puranas were no sacred writers but mystificators.
 That it has such a meaning, the Hindu Occultists are a proof,
 and they alone are able to enlighten Science, as to why and how,
 "the fire, that was primevally <em>one</em>,<em> </em>was
 made threefold (<em>treta</em>)<em> </em>in our present Manvantara,
 by the Son of Ila (Vach), the primeval woman after the Deluge,
 the wife and daughter of Vaivasvata Manu. The allegory is suggestive,
 in whatever Purana it may be read and studied.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Gandharva of the Veda is the deity who knows and reveals
 the secrets of heaven and divine truths to mortals. <em>Cosmically
 </em>--<em> </em>the Gandharvas are the aggregate powers of the
 solar-fire, and constitute its Forces; <em>psychically </em>--<em>
 </em>the intelligence residing in the <em>Sushumna</em>,<em> </em>Solar
 ray, the highest of the <em>seven </em>rays;<em> mystically </em>--<em>
 </em>the occult force in the Soma (the moon, or lunar plant) and
 the drink made of it; <em>physically </em>--<em> </em>the phenomenal,
 and <em>spiritually </em>--<em> </em>the noumenal causes of <em>Sound
 </em>and the "Voice of Nature." Hence, they are called
 the 6,333 "heavenly Singers" and musicians of Indra's
 loka who personify (even in number) the various and manifold sounds
 in Nature, both above and below. In the latter allegories they
 are said to have mystic power over women, and <em>to be fond of
 them. </em>The esoteric meaning is plain. They are one of the
 forms, if not the prototypes, of Enoch's angels, the Sons of God,
 who saw that the daughters of men were fair (Gen. vi.) who married
 them, and taught the daughters of the Earth <em>the secrets of
 Heaven.</em> 
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-07.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>