<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 35 STANZA I.</h6>
 
 <h4>COMMENTARIES</h4>
 
 <p>
 ON THE SEVEN STANZAS AND THEIR TERMS, ACCORDING TO THEIR<br>
 NUMERATION, IN STANZAS AND SLOKAS.
 </p><h4>STANZA I.</h4>
 
 <p>
 1. "<strong>T</strong>HE<strong> E</strong>TERNAL<strong>
 P</strong>ARENT (Space), WRAPPED IN HER EVER INVISIBLE ROBES,
 HAD SLUMBERED ONCE AGAIN FOR SEVEN ETERNITIES (<em>a</em>)."
 </p><p>
 The "Parent Space" is the eternal, ever present cause
 of all -- the incomprehensible DEITY, whose "invisible robes"
 are the mystic root of all matter, and of the Universe. Space
 is the <em>one eternal thing </em>that we can most easily imagine,
 immovable in its abstraction and uninfluenced by either the presence
 or absence in it of an objective Universe. It is without dimension,
 in every sense, and self-existent. Spirit is the first differentiation
 from <strong>T</strong>HAT, the causeless cause of both Spirit
 and Matter. It is, as taught in the esoteric catechism, neither
 limitless void, nor conditioned fulness, but both. It was and
 ever will be. (See Proem pp. 2 <em>et seq.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Thus, the "Robes" stand for the noumenon of undifferentiated
 Cosmic Matter. It is not matter as we know it, but the spiritual
 essence of matter, and is co-eternal and even one with Space in
 its abstract sense. Root-nature is also the source of the subtile
 invisible properties in visible matter. It is the Soul, so to
 say, of the ONE infinite Spirit. The Hindus call it Mulaprakriti,
 and say that it is the primordial substance, which is the basis
 of the Upadhi or vehicle of every phenomenon, whether physical,
 mental or psychic. It is the source from which Akasa radiates.
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>By the Seven "Eternities," aeons
 or periods are meant. The word "Eternity," as understood
 in Christian theology, has no meaning to the Asiatic ear, except
 in its application to the ONE existence; nor is</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 36 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the term sempiternity, the eternal only in futurity, anything
 better than a misnomer.* Such words do not and cannot exist in
 philosophical metaphysics, and were unknown till the advent of
 ecclesiastical Christianity. The Seven Eternities meant are the
 seven periods, or a period answering in its duration to the seven
 periods, of a Manvantara, and extending throughout a Maha-Kalpa
 or the "Great Age" -- 100 years of Brahma -- making
 a total of 311,040,000,000,000 of years; each year of Brahma being
 composed of 360 "days," and of the same number of "nights"
 of Brahma (reckoning by the Chandrayana or lunar year); and a
 "Day of Brahma" consisting of 4,320,000,000 of mortal
 years. These "Eternities" belong to the most secret
 calculations, in which, in order to arrive at the true total,
 every figure must be 7<em>x</em> (7 to the power of <em>x</em>);<em>
 x </em>varying according to the nature of the cycle in the subjective
 or real world; and every figure or number relating to, or representing
 all the different cycles from the greatest to the smallest --
 in the objective or unreal world -- must necessarily be multiples
 of seven. The key to this cannot be given, for herein lies the
 mystery of esoteric calculations, and for the purposes of ordinary
 calculation it has no sense. "The number seven," says
 the Kabala, "is the great number of the Divine Mysteries;"
 number ten is that of all human knowledge (Pythagorean decade);
 1,000 is the number ten to the third power, and therefore the
 number 7,000 is also symbolical. In the Secret Doctrine the figure
 and number 4 are the male symbol only on the highest plane of
 abstraction; on the plane of matter the 3 is the masculine and
 the 4 the female: the upright and the horizontal in the fourth
 stage of symbolism, when the symbols became the glyphs of the
 generative powers on the physical plane.
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK1">-------</a> 
 </p><h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 2. <strong>T</strong>IME WAS NOT, FOR IT LAY ASLEEP IN THE INFINITE
 BOSOM OF DURATION (<em>a</em>).
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is stated in Book II., ch. viii., of Vishnu Purana: "By
 immortality is meant existence to the end of the Kalpa;"
 and Wilson, the translator, remarks in a footnote: "This,
 according to the Vedas, is all that is to be understood of the
 immortality (or eternity) of the gods; they perish at the end
 of universal dissolution (or Pralaya)." And Esoteric philosophy
 says: They "perish" not, but are <em>re-absorbed.</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 37 TIME AND UNIVERSAL MIND.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (<em>a</em>) Time is only an illusion produced by the succession
 of our states of consciousness as we travel through eternal duration,
 and it does not exist where no consciousness exists in which the
 illusion can be produced; but "lies asleep." The present
 is only a mathematical line which divides that part of eternal
 duration which we call the future, from that part which we call
 the past. Nothing on earth has real duration, for nothing remains
 without change -- or the same -- for the billionth part of a second;
 and the sensation we have of the actuality of the division of
 "time" known as the present, comes from the blurring
 of that momentary glimpse, or succession of glimpses, of things
 that our senses give us, as those things pass from the region
 of ideals which we call the future, to the region of memories
 that we name the past. In the same way we experience a sensation
 of duration in the case of the instantaneous electric spark, by
 reason of the blurred and continuing impression on the retina.
 The real person or thing does not consist solely of what is seen
 at any particular moment, but is composed of the sum of all its
 various and changing conditions from its appearance in the material
 form to its disappearance from the earth. It is these "sum-totals"
 that exist from eternity in the "future," and pass by
 degrees through matter, to exist for eternity in the "past."
 No one could say that a bar of metal dropped into the sea came
 into existence as it left the air, and ceased to exist as it entered
 the water, and that the bar itself consisted only of that cross-section
 thereof which at any given moment coincided with the mathematical
 plane that separates, and, at the same time, joins, the atmosphere
 and the ocean. Even so of persons and things, which, dropping
 out of the to-be into the has-been, out of the future into the
 past -- present momentarily to our senses a cross-section, as
 it were, of their total selves, as they pass through time and
 space (as matter) on their way from one eternity to another: and
 these two constitute that "duration" in which alone
 anything has true existence, were our senses but able to cognize
 it there.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 3. <em>. .</em> . <strong>U</strong>NIVERSAL MIND WAS NOT, FOR
 THERE WERE NO <strong>A</strong>H-HI (celestial beings) TO CONTAIN
 (hence to manifest) IT (<em>a</em>)<em>.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 38 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (<em>a</em>) Mind is a name given to the sum of the states of
 Consciousness grouped under Thought, Will, and Feeling. During
 deep sleep, ideation ceases on the physical plane, and memory
 is in abeyance; thus for the time-being "Mind is not,"
 because the organ, through which the Ego manifests ideation and
 memory on the material plane, has temporarily ceased to function.
 A noumenon can become a phenomenon on any plane of existence only
 by manifesting on that plane through an appropriate basis or vehicle;
 and during the long night of rest called Pralaya, when all the
 existences are dissolved, the "<strong>U</strong>NIVERSAL
 <strong>M</strong>IND" remains as a permanent possibility
 of mental action, or as that abstract absolute thought, of which
 mind is the concrete relative manifestation. The <strong>A</strong>H-HI
 (Dhyan-Chohans) are the collective hosts of spiritual beings --
 the Angelic Hosts of Christianity, the Elohim and "Messengers"
 of the Jews -- who are the vehicle for the manifestation of the
 divine or universal thought and will. They are the Intelligent
 Forces that give to and enact in Nature her "laws,"
 while themselves acting according to laws imposed upon them in
 a similar manner by still higher Powers; but they are not "the
 personifications" of the powers of Nature, as erroneously
 thought. This hierarchy of spiritual Beings, through which the
 Universal Mind comes into action, is like an army -- a "Host,"
 truly -- by means of which the fighting power of a nation manifests
 itself, and which is composed of army corps, divisions, brigades,
 regiments, and so forth, each with its separate individuality
 or life, and its limited freedom of action and limited responsibilities;
 each contained in a larger individuality, to which its own interests
 are subservient, and each containing lesser individualities in
 itself.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 4. <strong>T</strong>HE SEVEN WAYS TO BLISS (Moksha* or Nirvana)
 WERE NOT (<em>a</em>)<em>. </em><strong>T</strong>HE GREAT CAUSES
 OF MISERY (Nidana** and Maya) WERE NOT, FOR THERE WAS NO ONE TO
 PRODUCE AND GET ENSNARED BY THEM (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) There are seven "Paths" or "Ways"
 to the bliss of Non-Exist-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *Nippang in China; Neibban in Burmah; or Moksha in India.
 </p><p>
 ** The "12" Nidanas (in Tibetan Ten-brel chug-nyi) the
 chief causes of existence, effects generated by a concatenation
 of causes produced (see Comment. II).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 39 THE CAUSES OF BEING.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ence, which is absolute Being, Existence, and Consciousness. They
 were not, because the Universe was, so far, empty, and existed
 only in the Divine Thought. For it is . . .
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) The twelve Nidanas or causes of being. Each is the
 effect of its antecedent cause, and a cause, in its turn, to its
 successor; the sum total of the Nidanas being based on the four
 truths, a doctrine especially characteristic of the Hinayana System.*
 They belong to the theory of the stream of catenated law which
 produces merit and demerit, and finally brings Karma into full
 sway. It is based upon the great truth that re-incarnation is
 to be dreaded, as existence in this world only entails upon man
 suffering, misery and pain; Death itself being unable to deliver
 man from it, since death is merely the door through which he passes
 to another life on earth after a little rest on its threshold
 -- Devachan. The Hinayana System, or School of the "Little
 Vehicle," is of very ancient growth; while the Mahayana is
 of a later period, having originated after the death of Buddha.
 Yet the tenets of the latter are as old as the hills that have
 contained such schools from time immemorial, and the Hinayana
 and Mahayana Schools (the latter, that of the "Great Vehicle")
 both teach the same doctrine in reality. <em>Yana, </em>or Vehicle
 (in Sanskrit, Vahan) is a mystic expression, both "vehicles"
 inculcating that man may escape the sufferings of rebirths and
 even the false bliss of Devachan, by obtaining Wisdom and Knowledge,
 which alone can dispel the Fruits of Illusion and Ignorance.
 </p><p>
 Maya or illusion is an element which enters into all finite things,
 for everything that exists has only a relative, not an absolute,
 reality, since the appearance which the hidden noumenon assumes
 for any observer depends upon his power of cognition. To the untrained
 eye of the savage, a painting is at first an unmeaning confusion
 of streaks and daubs of color, while an educated eye sees instantly
 a face or a landscape. Nothing is permanent except the one hidden
 absolute existence which contains in itself the noumena of all
 realities. The existences belonging to every plane of being, up
 to the highest Dhyan-Chohans, are, in degree, of the nature of
 shadows cast by a magic lantern on a colourless screen; but all
 things are relatively real, for the cogniser is also a reflection,
 and the things cognised are therefore as real to him as himself.
 Whatever reality things possess must be looked for in them
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See Wassilief on Buddhism, pp. 97-950.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 40 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 before or after they have passed like a flash through the material
 world; but we cannot cognise any such existence directly, so long
 as we have sense-instruments which bring only material existence
 into the field of our consciousness. Whatever plane our consciousness
 may be acting in, both we and the things belonging to that plane
 are, for the time being, our only realities. As we rise in the
 scale of development we perceive that during the stages through
 which we have passed we mistook shadows for realities, and the
 upward progress of the Ego is a series of progressive awakenings,
 each advance bringing with it the idea that now, at last, we have
 reached "reality;" but only when we shall have reached
 the absolute Consciousness, and blended our own with it, shall
 we be free from the delusions produced by Maya.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 5. <strong>D</strong>ARKNESS ALONE FILLED THE BOUNDLESS ALL (<em>a</em>),
 FOR FATHER, MOTHER AND SON WERE ONCE MORE ONE, AND THE SON HAD
 NOT AWAKENED YET FOR THE NEW WHEEL* AND HIS PILGRIMAGE THEREON
 (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) "Darkness is Father-Mother: light their son,"
 says an old Eastern proverb. Light is inconceivable except as
 coming from some source which is the cause of it; and as, in the
 instance of primordial light, that source is unknown, though as
 strongly demanded by reason and logic, therefore it is called
 "Darkness" by us, from an intellectual point of view.
 As to borrowed or secondary light, whatever its source, it can
 be but of a temporary mayavic character. Darkness, then, is the
 eternal
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * That which is called "wheel" is the symbolical expression
 for a world or globe, which shows that the ancients were aware
 that our Earth was a revolving globe, not a motionless square
 as some Christian Fathers taught. The "Great Wheel"
 is the whole duration of our Cycle of being, or Maha Kalpa, <em>i.e.</em>,
 the whole revolution of our special chain of seven planets or
 Spheres from beginning to end; the "Small Wheels" meaning
 the Rounds, of which there are also Seven.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 41 WHAT IS DARKNESS IN PHILOSOPHY?</h6>
 
 <p>
 matrix in which the sources of light appear and disappear. Nothing
 is added to darkness to make of it light, or to light to make
 it darkness, on this our plane. They are interchangeable, and
 scientifically light is but a mode of darkness and <em>vice versa.
 </em>Yet both are phenomena of the same noumenon -- which is absolute
 darkness to the scientific mind, and but a gray twilight to the
 perception of the average mystic, though to that of the spiritual
 eye of the Initiate it is absolute light. How far we discern the
 light that shines in darkness depends upon our powers of vision.
 What is light to us is darkness to certain insects, and the eye
 of the clairvoyant sees illumination where the normal eye perceives
 only blackness. When the whole universe was plunged in sleep --
 had returned to its one primordial element -- there was neither
 centre of luminosity, nor eye to perceive light, and darkness
 necessarily filled the boundless all.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>The Father-Mother are the male and female
 principles in root-nature, the opposite poles that manifest in
 all things on every plane of Kosmos, or Spirit and Substance,
 in a less allegorical aspect, the resultant of which is the Universe,
 or the Son. They are "once more One" when in "The
 Night of Brahma," during Pralaya, all in the objective Universe
 has returned to its one primal and eternal cause, to reappear
 at the following Dawn -- as it does periodically. "Karana"
 -- eternal cause -- was alone. To put it more plainly: Karana
 is alone during the "Nights of Brahma." The previous
 objective Universe has dissolved into its one primal and eternal
 cause, and is, so to say, held in solution in space, to differentiate
 again and crystallize out anew at the following Manvantaric dawn,
 which is the commencement of a new "Day" or new activity
 of Brahma -- the symbol of the Universe. In esoteric parlance,
 Brahma is Father-Mother-Son, or Spirit, Soul and Body at once;
 each personage being symbolical of an attribute, and each attribute
 or quality being a graduated efflux of Divine Breath in its cyclic
 differentiation, involutionary and evolutionary. In the cosmicophysical
 sense, it is the Universe, the planetary chain and the earth;
 in the purely spiritual, the Unknown Deity, Planetary Spirit,
 and Man -- the Son of the two, the creature of Spirit and Matter,
 and a manifestation of them in his periodical appearances on Earth
 during the "wheels," or the Manvantaras. -- (<em>See
 </em>Part II. ยง: "<em>Days and Nights of Brahma.</em>")
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 42 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 6. <strong>T</strong>HE SEVEN SUBLIME <strong>L</strong>ORDS AND
 THE SEVEN <strong>T</strong>RUTHS HAD CEASED TO BE (<em>a</em>),<em>
 </em>AND THE <strong>U</strong>NIVERSE, THE SON OF NECESSITY,
 WAS IMMERSED IN <strong>P</strong>ARANISHPANNA (<em>b</em>) (absolute
 perfection, Paranirvana, which is Yong-Grub) TO BE OUT-BREATHED
 BY THAT WHICH IS AND YET IS NOT. <strong>N</strong>AUGHT WAS (<em>c</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The seven sublime lords are the Seven Creative Spirits,
 the Dhyan-Chohans, who correspond to the Hebrew Elohim. It is
 the same hierarchy of Archangels to which St. Michael, St. Gabriel,
 and others belong, in the Christian theogony. Only while St. Michael,
 for instance, is allowed in dogmatic Latin theology to watch over
 all the promontories and gulfs, in the Esoteric System, the Dhyanis
 watch successively over one of the Rounds and the great Root-races
 of our planetary chain. They are, moreover, said to send their
 Bhodisatvas, the human correspondents of the Dhyani-Buddhas (of
 whom <em>vide infra</em>)<em> </em>during every Round and Race.
 Out of the Seven Truths and Revelations, or rather revealed secrets,
 four only have been handed to us, as we are still in the Fourth
 Round, and the world also has only had four Buddhas, so far. This
 is a very complicated question, and will receive more ample treatment
 later on.
 </p><p>
 So far "There are only Four Truths, and Four Vedas"
 -- say the Hindus and Buddhists. For a similar reason Irenaeus
 insisted on the necessity of Four Gospels. But as every new Root-race
 at the head of a Round must have its revelation and revealers,
 the next Round will bring the Fifth, the following the Sixth,
 and so on.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>"<em>Paranishpanna</em>"<em> </em>is
 the absolute perfection to which all existences attain at the
 close of a great period of activity, or Maha-Manvantara, and in
 which they rest during the succeeding period of repose. In Tibetan
 it is called Yong-Grub. Up to the day of the Yogacharya school
 the true nature of Paranirvana was taught publicly, but since
 then it has become entirely esoteric; hence so many contradictory
 interpretations of it. It is only a true Idealist who can understand
 it. Everything has to be viewed as ideal, with the exception of
 Paranirvana, by him who would comprehend that state, and acquire
 a knowledge of how Non Ego, Voidness, and Darkness are Three in
 One and alone Self-existent and perfect. It is absolute, however,
 only in a relative</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 43 MOTIONS, THE "GREAT BREATH."
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 sense, for it must give room to still further absolute perfection,
 according to a higher standard of excellence in the following
 period of activity -- just as a perfect flower must cease to be
 a perfect flower and die, in order to grow into a perfect fruit,
 -- if a somewhat Irish mode of expression may be permitted.
 </p><p>
 The Secret Doctrine teaches the progressive development of everything,
 worlds as well as atoms; and this stupendous development has neither
 conceivable beginning nor imaginable end. Our "Universe"
 is only one of an infinite number of Universes, all of them "Sons
 of Necessity," because links in the great Cosmic chain of
 Universes, each one standing in the relation of an effect as regards
 its predecessor, and being a cause as regards its successor.
 </p><p>
 The appearance and disappearance of the Universe are pictured
 as an outbreathing and inbreathing of "the Great Breath,"
 which is eternal, and which, being Motion, is one of the three
 aspects of the Absolute -- Abstract Space and Duration being the
 other two. When the "Great Breath" is projected, it
 is called the Divine Breath, and is regarded as the breathing
 of the Unknowable Deity -- the One Existence -- which breathes
 out a thought, as it were, which becomes the Kosmos. (See "Isis
 Unveiled.") So also is it when the Divine Breath is inspired
 again the Universe disappears into the bosom of "the Great
 Mother," who then sleeps "wrapped in her invisible robes."
 </p><p>
 (<em>c</em>)<em> </em>By "that which is and yet is not"
 is meant the Great Breath itself, which we can only speak of as
 absolute existence, but cannot picture to our imagination as any
 form of existence that we can distinguish from Non-existence.
 The three periods -- the Present, the Past, and the Future --
 are in the esoteric philosophy a compound time; for the three
 are a composite number only in relation to the phenomenal plane,
 but in the realm of noumena have no abstract validity. As said
 in the Scriptures: "The Past time is the Present time, as
 also the Future, which, though it has not come into existence,
 still is"; according to a precept in the Prasanga Madhyamika
 teaching, whose dogmas have been known ever since it broke away
 from the purely esoteric schools.* Our ideas, in short, on duration
 and time are all derived from our
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See Dzungarian "Mani Kumbum," the "Book of the
 10,000 Precepts." Also consult Wassilief's "Der Buddhismus,"
 pp. 327 and 357, etc.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 44 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 sensations according to the laws of Association. Inextricably
 bound up with the relativity of human knowledge, they nevertheless
 can have no existence except in the experience of the individual
 ego, and perish when its evolutionary march dispels the Maya of
 phenomenal existence. What is Time, for instance, but the panoramic
 succession of our states of consciousness? In the words of a Master,
 "I feel irritated at having to use these three clumsy words
 -- Past, Present, and Future -- miserable concepts of the objective
 phases of the subjective whole, they are about as ill-adapted
 for the purpose as an axe for fine carving." One has to acquire
 <em>Paramartha </em>lest one should become too easy a prey to
 <em>Samvriti </em>-- is a philosophical axiom.*
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 7. <strong>T</strong>HE CAUSES OF EXISTENCE HAD BEEN DONE AWAY
 WITH (<em>a</em>); THE VISIBLE THAT WAS, AND THE INVISIBLE THAT
 IS, RESTED IN ETERNAL NON-BEING, THE ONE BEING (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) "The Causes of Existence" mean not only
 the physical causes known to science, but the metaphysical causes,
 the chief of which is the desire to exist, an outcome of Nidana
 and Maya. This desire for a sentient life shows itself in everything,
 from an atom to a sun, and is a reflection of the Divine Thought
 propelled into objective existence, into a law that the Universe
 should exist. According to esoteric teaching, the real cause of
 that supposed desire, and of all existence, remains for ever hidden,
 and its first emanations are the most complete abstractions mind
 can conceive. These abstractions must of necessity be postulated
 as the cause of the material Universe which presents itself to
 the senses and intellect; and they underlie the secondary and
 subordinate powers of Nature, which, anthropomorphized, have been
 worshipped as God and gods by the common herd of every age. It
 is impossible to conceive anything without a cause; the attempt
 to do so makes the mind a blank.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In clearer words: "One has to acquire true Self-Consciousness
 in order to understand <em>Samvriti, </em>or the 'origin of delusion.'"
 <em>Paramartha</em> is the synonym of the Sanskrit term <em>Svasam-vedana,
 </em>or "the reflection which analyses itself." There
 is a difference in the interpretation of the meaning of "<em>Paramartha</em>"<em>
 </em>between the Yogacharyas and the Madhyamikas, neither of whom,
 however, explain the real and true esoteric sense of the expression.
 See further, sloka No. 9.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 45 BEING AND NON-BEING.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This is virtually the condition to which the mind must come at
 last when we try to trace back the chain of causes and effects,
 but both science and religion jump to this condition of blankness
 much more quickly than is necessary; for they ignore the metaphysical
 abstractions which are the only conceivable cause of physical
 concretions. These abstractions become more and more concrete
 as they approach our plane of existence, until finally they phenomenalise
 in the form of the material Universe, by a process of conversion
 of metaphysics into physics, analogous to that by which steam
 can be condensed into water, and the water frozen into ice.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>The idea of Eternal Non-Being, which is
 the One Being, will appear a paradox to anyone who does not remember
 that we limit our ideas of being to our present consciousness
 of existence; making it a specific, instead of a generic term.
 An unborn infant, could it think in our acceptation of that term,
 would necessarily limit its conception of being, in a similar
 manner, to the intrauterine life which alone it knows; and were
 it to endeavour to express to its consciousness the idea of life
 after birth (death to it), it would, in the absence of data to
 go upon, and of faculties to comprehend such data, probably express
 that life as "Non-Being which is Real Being." In our
 case the One Being is the noumenon of all the noumena which we
 know must underlie phenomena, and give them whatever shadow of
 reality they possess, but which we have not the senses or the
 intellect to cognize at present. The impalpable atoms of gold
 scattered through the substance of a ton of auriferous quartz
 may be imperceptible to the naked eye of the miner, yet he knows
 that they are not only present there but that they alone give
 his quartz any appreciable value; and this relation of the gold
 to the quartz may faintly shadow forth that of the noumenon to
 the phenomenon. But the miner knows what the gold will look like
 when extracted from the quartz, whereas the common mortal can
 form no conception of the reality of things separated from the
 Maya which veils them, and in which they are hidden. Alone the
 Initiate, rich with the lore acquired by numberless generations
 of his predecessors, directs the "Eye of Dangma" toward
 the essence of things in which no Maya can have any influence.
 It is here that the teachings of esoteric philosophy in relation
 to the Nidanas and the Four Truths become of the greatest importance;
 but they are secret.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 46 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 8. <strong>A</strong>LONE, THE ONE FORM OF EXISTENCE STRETCHED
 BOUNDLESS, INFINITE, CAUSELESS, IN DREAMLESS SLEEP (<em>a</em>);
 AND LIFE PULSATED UNCONSCIOUS IN UNIVERSAL SPACE, THROUGHOUT THAT
 <strong>A</strong>LL-<strong>P</strong>RESENCE WHICH IS SENSED
 BY THE "<strong>O</strong>PENED <strong>E</strong>YE"*
 OF THE <strong>D</strong>ANGMA (<em>b</em>).**
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The tendency of modern thought is to recur to the
 archaic idea of a homogeneous basis for apparently widely different
 things -- heterogeneity developed from homogeneity. Biologists
 are now searching for their homogeneous protoplasm and chemists
 for their protyle, while science is looking for the force of which
 electricity, magnetism, heat, and so forth, are the differentiations.
 The Secret Doctrine carries this idea into the region of metaphysics
 and postulates a "One Form of Existence" as the basis
 and source of all things. But perhaps the phrase, the "One
 Form of Existence," is not altogether correct. The Sanskrit
 word is Prabhavapyaya, "the place, or rather plane, whence
 emerges the origination, and into which is the resolution of all
 things," says a commentator. It is not the "Mother of
 the World," as translated by Wilson (see Book I., Vishnu
 Purana); for Jagad Yoni (as shown by FitzEdward Hall) is scarcely
 so much "the Mother of the World" or "the Womb
 of the World" as the "Material Cause of the Universe."
 The Puranic Commentators explain it by Karana -- "Cause"
 -- but the Esoteric philosophy, by the <em>ideal spirit of that
 cause. </em>It is, in its secondary stage, the Svabhavat of the
 Buddhist philosopher, the eternal cause and effect, omnipresent
 yet abstract, the self-existent plastic Essence and the root of
 all things, viewed in the same dual light as the Vedantin views
 his Parabrahm and Mulaprakriti, the one under two aspects. It
 seems indeed extraordinary to find great scholars speculating
 on the possibility of the Vedanta, and the Uttara-Mimansa especially,
 having been "evoked by the teachings of the Buddhists,"
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In India it is called "The Eye of Siva," but beyond
 the great range it is known as "Dangma's opened eye"
 in esoteric phraseology.
 </p><p>
 ** Dangma means a purified soul, one who has become a Jivanmukta,
 the highest adept, or rather a Mahatma so-called. His "opened
 eye" is the inner spiritual eye of the seer, and the faculty
 which manifests through it is not clairvoyance as ordinarily understood,
 <em>i.e.</em>, the power of seeing at a distance, but rather the
 faculty of spiritual intuition, through which direct and certain
 knowledge is obtainable. This faculty is intimately connected
 with the "third eye," which mythological tradition ascribes
 to certain races of men. Fuller explanations will be found in
 Book II.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 47 THE EYE OF DANGMA.</h6>
 
 <p>
 whereas, it is on the contrary Buddhism (of Gautama, the Buddha)
 that was "evoked" and entirely upreared on the tenets
 of the Secret Doctrine, of which a partial sketch is here attempted,
 and on which, also, the Upanishads are made to rest.* The above,
 according to the teachings of Sri Sankaracharya,** is undeniable.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) Dreamless sleep is one of the seven states of consciousness
 known in Oriental esotericism. In each of these states a different
 portion of the mind comes into action; or as a Vedantin would
 express it, the individual is conscious in a different plane of
 his being. The term "dreamless sleep," in this case
 is applied allegorically to the Universe to express a condition
 somewhat analogous to that state of consciousness in man, which,
 not being remembered in a waking state, seems a blank, just as
 the sleep of the mesmerised subject seems to him an unconscious
 blank when he returns to his normal condition, although he has
 been talking and acting as a conscious individual would.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA I. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 9. <strong>B</strong>UT WHERE WAS THE <strong>D</strong>ANGMA
 WHEN THE <strong>A</strong>LAYA OF THE <strong>U</strong>NIVERSE
 (<em>Soul as the basis of all, Anima Mundi</em>)<em> </em>WAS
 IN <strong>P</strong>ARAMARTHA (<em>a</em>) (<em>Absolute Being
 and Consciousness which are Absolute Non-Being and</em> <em>Unconsciousness</em>)<em>
 </em>AND THE GREAT WHEEL WAS <strong>A</strong>NUPADAKA (<em>b</em>)?
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * And yet, one, <em>claiming authority, </em>namely, Sir Monier
 Williams, Boden Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford, has just denied
 this fact. This is what he taught his audience, on June the 4th,
 1888, in his annual address before the Victoria Institute of Great
 Britain: "Originally, Buddhism set its face against all solitary
 asceticism . <em>. .</em> to attain sublime heights of knowledge.
 It <em>had no occult, no esoteric system </em>of doctrine . <em>.
 .</em> withheld from ordinary men" (!!) And, again: "
 . . . When Gautama Buddha began his career, the <em>later and
 lower </em>form of Yoga seems to have been little known."
 And then, contradicting himself, the learned lecturer forthwith
 informs his audience that "We learn from<em> Lalita-Vistara
 </em>that various forms of bodily torture, self-maceration, and
 austerity were common in Gautama's time." (!!) But the lecturer
 seems quite unaware that this kind of torture and self-maceration
 is precisely the <em>lower </em>form of Yoga, <em>Hatha </em>Yoga,
 which was "little known" and yet so "<em>common</em>"<em>
 </em>in Gautama's time.
 </p><p>
 ** It is even argued that all the Six Darsanas (Schools of philosophy)
 show traces of Buddha's influence, being either taken from Buddhism
 or due to Greek teaching! (See Weber, Max Muller, etc.) We labour
 under the impression that Colebrooke, "the highest authority"
 in such matters, had long ago settled the question by showing,
 that "the Hindus were in this instance the teachers, not
 the learners."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 48 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (<em>a</em>) Here we have before us the subject of centuries of
 scholastic disputations. The two terms "Alaya" and "Paramartha"
 have been the causes of dividing schools and splitting the truth
 into more different aspects than any other mystic terms. Alaya
 is literally the "Soul of the World" or Anima Mundi,
 the "Over-Soul" of Emerson, and according to esoteric
 teaching it changes periodically its nature. Alaya, though eternal
 and changeless in its inner essence on the planes which are unreachable
 by either men or Cosmic Gods (Dhyani Buddhas), alters during the
 active life-period with respect to the lower planes, ours included.
 During that time not only the Dhyani-Buddhas are one with Alaya
 in Soul and Essence, but even the man strong in the Yoga (mystic
 meditation) "is able to merge his soul with it" (Aryasanga,
 the<em> Bumapa </em>school). This is not Nirvana, but a condition
 next to it. Hence the disagreement. Thus, while the Yogacharyas
 (of the Mahayana school) say that Alaya is the personification
 of the Voidness, and yet Alaya (<em>Nyingpo </em>and<em> Tsang
 </em>in Tibetan) is the basis of every visible and invisible thing,
 and that, though it is eternal and immutable in its essence, it
 reflects itself in every object of the Universe "like the
 moon in clear tranquil water"; other schools dispute the
 statement. The same for Paramartha: the Yogacharyas interpret
 the term as that which is also dependent upon other things (<em>paratantra</em>);<em>
 </em>and the Madhyamikas say that Paramartha is limited to Paranishpanna
 or absolute perfection; <em>i.e.</em>,<em> </em>in the exposition
 of these "two truths" (out of four), the former believe
 and maintain that (on this plane, at any rate) there exists only
 Samvritisatya or relative truth; and the latter teach the existence
 of Paramarthasatya, the "absolute truth."* "No
 Arhat, oh mendicants, can reach absolute knowledge before he becomes
 one with Paranirvana. <em>Parikalpita </em>and <em>Paratantra
 </em>are his two great enemies" (Aphorisms of the Bodhisattvas).
 <em>Parikalpita </em>(in Tibetan <em>Kun-ttag</em>)<em> </em>is
 error, made by those unable to realize the emptiness and illusionary
 nature of all; who believe something to exist which does not --
 <em>e.g.</em>, the Non-Ego. And
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *"Paramartha" is self-consciousness in Sanskrit, Svasamvedana,
 or the "self-analysing reflection" -- from two words,
 parama (above everything) and artha (comprehension), Satya meaning
 absolute true being, or Esse. In Tibetan Paramarthasatya is Dondampaidenpa.
 The opposite of this absolute reality, or actuality, is Samvritisatya
 -- the relative truth only -- "Samvriti" meaning "false
 conception" and being the origin of illusion, Maya; in Tibetan
 Kundzabchi-denpa, "illusion-creating appearance."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 49 ALAYA, THE UNIVERSAL SOUL.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>Paratantra </em>is that, whatever it is, which exists only
 through a dependent or causal connexion, and which has to disappear
 as soon as the cause from which it proceeds is removed -- <em>e.g</em>.,
 the light of a wick. Destroy or extinguish it, and light disappears.
 </p><p>
 Esoteric philosophy teaches that everything lives and is conscious,
 but not that all life and consciousness are similar to those of
 human or even animal beings. Life we look upon as "the one
 form of existence," manifesting in what is called matter;
 or, as in man, what, incorrectly separating them, we name Spirit,
 Soul and Matter. Matter is the vehicle for the manifestation of
 soul on this plane of existence, and soul is the vehicle on a
 higher plane for the manifestation of spirit, and these three
 are a trinity synthesized by Life, which pervades them all. The
 idea of universal life is one of those ancient conceptions which
 are returning to the human mind in this century, as a consequence
 of its liberation from anthropomorphic theology. Science, it is
 true, contents itself with tracing or postulating the signs of
 universal life, and has not yet been bold enough even to whisper
 "Anima Mundi!" The idea of "crystalline life,"
 now familiar to science, would have been scouted half a century
 ago. Botanists are now searching for the nerves of plants; not
 that they suppose that plants can feel or think as animals do,
 but because they believe that some structure, bearing the same
 relation functionally to plant life that nerves bear to animal
 life, is necessary to explain vegetable growth and nutrition.
 It hardly seems possible that science can disguise from itself
 much longer, by the mere use of terms such as "force"
 and "energy," the fact that things that have life are
 living things, whether they be atoms or planets.
 </p><p>
 But what is the belief of the inner esoteric Schools? the reader
 may ask. What are the doctrines taught on this subject by the
 Esoteric "Buddhists"? With them "Alaya" has
 a double and even a triple meaning. In the Yogacharya system of
 the contemplative Mahayana school, Alaya is both the Universal
 Soul (Anima Mundi) and the Self of a progressed adept. "He
 who is strong in the Yoga can introduce at will his Alaya by means
 of meditation into the true Nature of Existence." The "Alaya
 has an absolute eternal existence," says Aryasanga -- the
 rival of Nagarjuna.* In one sense it is <em>Pradhana; </em>which
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Aryasanga was a pre-Christian Adept and founder of a Buddhist
 esoteric school, though Csoma di Koros places him, for some reasons
 of his own, in the seventh century [[Footnote continued on next
 page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 50 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is explained in Vishnu Purana as: "that which is the unevolved
 cause, is emphatically called by the most eminent sages Pradhana,
 original base, which is subtile Prakriti, viz., that which is
 eternal, and which at once is (or comprehends) what is and what
 is not, or is mere process." "Prakriti," however,
 is an incorrect word, and Alaya would explain it better; for Prakriti
 is not the "uncognizable Brahma."* It is a mistake of
 those who know nothing of the Universality of the Occult doctrines
 from the very cradle of the human races, and especially so of
 those scholars who reject the very idea of a "primordial
 revelation," to teach that the Anima Mundi, the One Life
 or "Universal Soul," was made known only by Anaxagoras,
 or during his age. This philosopher brought the teaching forward
 simply to oppose the too materialistic conceptions on Cosmogony
 of Democritus, based on his exoteric theory of <em>blindly </em>driven
 atoms. Anaxagoras of Clazomene was not its inventor but only its
 propagator, as also was Plato. That which he called Mundane Intelligence,
 the nous ([[<em>nous</em>]]), the principle that according to
 his views is absolutely separated and free from matter and acts
 on design,** was called Motion, the ONE LIFE, or <em>Jivatma</em>,
 ages<em> </em>before the year 500 B.C. in India. Only the Aryan
 philosophers never endowed the principle, which with them is infinite,
 with the finite "attribute" of "thinking."
 </p><p>
 This leads the reader naturally to the "Supreme Spirit"
 of Hegel and the German Transcendentalists as a contrast that
 it may be useful to point out. The schools of Schelling and Fichte
 have diverged widely from the primitive archaic conception of
 an ABSOLUTE principle, and have mirrored only an aspect of the
 basic idea of the Vedanta. Even the "Absoluter Geist"
 shadowed forth by von Hartman in his pessimistic philosophy of
 the Unconscious, while it is, perhaps, the closest approximation
 made by European speculation to the Hindu Adwaitee Doctrines,
 similarly falls far short of the reality.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] A.D. There was another
 Aryasanga, who lived during the first centuries of our era and
 the Hungarian scholar most probably confuses the two.
 </p><p>
 * "The indiscreet cause which is uniform, and both cause
 and effect, and which those who are acquainted with first principles
 call Pradhana and Prakriti, is the incognizable Brahma who was
 before all" (Vayu Purana); <em>i.e.</em>, Brahma does not
 put forth evolution itself or create, but only exhibits various
 aspects of itself, one of which is Prakriti, an aspect of Pradhana.
 </p><p>
 ** Finite Self-consciousness, I mean. For how can the <em>absolute
 </em>attain it otherwise than as simply an <em>aspect</em>,<em>
 </em>the highest of which known to us is human consciousness?
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 51 CAN THE FINITE CONCEIVE THE INFINITE?
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 According to Hegel, the "Unconscious" would never have
 undertaken the vast and laborious task of evolving the Universe,
 except in the hope of attaining clear Self-consciousness. In this
 connection it is to be borne in mind that in designating Spirit,
 which the European Pantheists use as equivalent to Parabrahm,
 as unconscious, they do not attach to that expression of "Spirit"
 -- one employed in the absence of a better to symbolise a profound
 mystery -- the connotation it usually bears.
 </p><p>
 The "Absolute Consciousness," they tell us, "behind"
 phenomena, which is only termed unconsciousness in the absence
 of any element of personality, transcends human conception. Man,
 unable to form one concept except in terms of empirical phenomena,
 is powerless from the very constitution of his being to raise
 the veil that shrouds the majesty of the Absolute. Only the liberated
 Spirit is able to faintly realise the nature of the source whence
 it sprung and whither it must eventually return. . . . As the
 highest Dhyan Chohan, however, can but bow in ignorance before
 the awful mystery of Absolute Being; and since, even in that culmination
 of conscious existence -- "the merging of the individual
 in the universal consciousness" -- to use a phrase of Fichte's
 -- the Finite cannot conceive the Infinite, nor can it apply to
 it its own standard of mental experiences, how can it be said
 that the "Unconscious" and the Absolute can have even
 an instinctive impulse or hope of attaining clear self-consciousness?*
 A Vedantin would never admit this Hegelian idea; and the Occultist
 would say that it applies perfectly to the awakened MAHAT, the
 Universal Mind already projected into the phenomenal world as
 the first aspect of the changeless ABSOLUTE, but never to the
 latter. "Spirit and Matter, or Purusha and Prakriti are but
 the two primeval aspects of the One and Secondless," we are
 taught.
 </p><p>
 The matter-moving Nous, the animating Soul, immanent in every
 atom, manifested in man, latent in the stone, has different degrees
 of power; and this pantheistic idea of a general Spirit-Soul pervading
 all Nature is the oldest of all the philosophical notions. Nor
 was the Archaeus a discovery of Paracelsus nor of his pupil Van
 Helmont; for it is again the same Archaeus or "Father-Ether,"
 -- the manifested basis
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See Schwegler's "Handbook of the History of Philosophy"
 in Sterling's translation, p. 28.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 52 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and source of the innumerable phenomena of life -- localised.
 The whole series of the numberless speculations of this kind are
 but variations on this theme, the key-note of which was struck
 in this primeval Revelation. (See Part II., "Primordial Substance.")
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>The term Anupadaka, "parentless,"
 or without progenitors, is a mystical designation having several
 meanings in the philosophy. By this name celestial beings, the
 Dhyan-Chohans or Dhyani-Buddhas, are generally meant. But as these
 correspond mystically to the human Buddhas and Bodhisattwas, known
 as the "Manushi (or human) Buddhas," the latter are
 also designated "Anupadaka," once that their whole personality
 is merged in their compound sixth and seventh principles -- or
 Atma-Buddhi, and that they have become the "diamond-souled"
 (Vajra-sattvas),* the full Mahatmas. The "Concealed Lord"
 (Sangbai Dag-po), "the one merged with the absolute,"
 can have no parents since he is Self-existent, and one with the
 Universal Spirit (Svayambhu),** the Svabhavat in the highest aspect.
 The mystery in the hierarchy of the Anupadaka is great, its apex
 being the universal Spirit-Soul, and the lower rung the Manushi-Buddha;
 and even every Soul-endowed man is an Anupadaka in a latent state.
 Hence, when speaking of the Universe in its formless, eternal,
 or absolute condition, before it was fashioned by the "Builders"
 -- the expression, "the Universe was Anupadaka." (See
 Part II., "Primordial Substance.")
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Vajra -- diamond-holder. In Tibetan <em>Dorjesempa; sempa </em>meaning
 the soul, its adamantine quality referring to its indestructibility
 in the hereafter. The explanation with regard to the "Anupadaka"
 given in the Kala Chakra, the first in the Gyu(t) division of
 the Kanjur, is half esoteric. It has misled the Orientalists into
 erroneous speculations with respect to the Dhyani-Buddhas and
 their earthly correspondencies, the Manushi-Buddhas. The real
 tenet is hinted at in a subsequent Volume, (see "The Mystery
 about Buddha"), and will be more fully explained in its proper
 place.
 </p><p>
 ** To quote Hegel again, who with Schelling practically accepted
 the Pantheistic conception of periodical Avatars (special incarnations
 of the World-Spirit in Man, as seen in the case of all the great
 religious reformers) . . . . "the essence of man is spirit
 . . . . only by stripping himself of his finiteness and surrendering
 himself to pure self-consciousness does he attain the truth. Christ-man,
 as man in whom the Unity of God-man (identity of the individual
 with the Universal consciousness as taught by the Vedantins and
 some Adwaitees) appeared, has, in his death and history generally,
 himself presented the eternal history of Spirit -- a history which
 every man has to accomplish in himself, in order to exist as Spirit."
 -- <em>Philosophy of History. </em>Sibree's English translation,
 p. 340.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-1-03.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>