<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 523 SUGGESTIVE ALLEGORIES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-3-06.htm">previous section</a>]]
 
 </p><h4>VII.<br>
 AN ATTACK ON THE SCIENTIFIC THEORY OF FORCE<br>
 BY A MAN OF SCIENCE.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE wise words of several (English) men of Science
 have now to be quoted in our favour. Ostracised for "principle's
 sake" by the few, they are tacitly approved of by the many.
 That one of them preaches almost Occult doctrines, in some things
 identical with, and often amounting to a public recognition of
 our "<em>Fohat </em>and his seven Sons" --</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 524 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Occult <em>Gandharva </em>of the Vedas -- will be recognised
 by every Occultist, and even by some profane readers.
 </p><p>
 If the latter open Volume V. of the <em>Popular Science Review
 </em>(pp. 329-334), they will find in it an article on "<em>Sun
 Force and Earth Force</em>,"<em> </em>by<em> </em>Dr. B.
 W. Richardson, <b>F.R.S.</b>, which reads as follows: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "At this moment, when the theory of mere motion as the origin
 of all varieties of force is again becoming the prevailing thought,
 it were almost heresy to re-open a debate, which for a period
 appears, by general consent, to be virtually closed; but I accept
 the risk, and shall state, therefore, what were the precise views
 of the immortal heretic, whose name I have whispered to the readers,
 (Samuel Metcalfe), respecting Sun Force. Starting with the argument
 on which nearly all physicists are agreed, that there exist in
 nature two agencies -- matter which is ponderable, visible, and
 tangible, and a something which is imponderable, invisible, and
 appreciable only by its influence on matter -- Metcalfe maintains
 that the imponderable and active agency which he calls '<i>caloric</i>'<i>
 </i>is<i> not a mere form of motion</i>,<i> </i>not a vibration
 amongst the particles of ponderable matter, but <i>itself a material
 substance flowing from the Sun </i>through Space,* filling the
 voids between the particles of solid bodies, and conveying by
 sensation the property called heat. The nature of caloric, or
 Sun-Force, is contended for by him on the following grounds: --
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(i.) That it may be added to, and abstracted from other
 bodies and measured with mathematical precision.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(ii.) That it augments the volume of bodies, which are again
 reduced in size by its abstraction.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(iii.) That it modifies the forms, properties, and conditions
 of all other bodies.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(iv.) That <i>it passes by radiation through the most perfect
 vacuum</i>**<i> </i>that can be formed, in which it produces the
 same effects on the thermometer as in the atmosphere.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(v.) That it exerts mechanical and chemical forces which
 nothing can restrain, as in volcanoes, the explosion of gunpowder,
 and other fulminating compounds.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(vi.) That it operates in a sensible manner on the nervous
 system, producing intense pain; and when in excess, disorganization
 of the tissues.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "As against the vibratory theory, Metcalfe further argues
 that if caloric were a <i>mere property or quality</i>,<i> </i>it
 could not augment the volume of other bodies; for this purpose
 it must itself have volume, it must occupy space, and it must,
 therefore, be a material agent. If caloric were <i>only the effect
 of vibratory motion </i>amongst the particles of ponderable matter,
 <i>it could not radiate from hot bodies </i>without the simultaneous
 transition of the vibrating particles; but the fact stands out
 that heat can radiate from material ponderable substance without
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Not only "through space," but filling every point
 of our solar system, for it is the physical residue, so to say,
 of Ether, its <em>lining </em>on our plane; Ether having to serve
 other cosmic and terrestrial purposes besides being the "<em>agent</em>"<em>
 </em>for transmitting light. It is the astral fluid or "Light"
 of the Kabalists, and the "Seven rays" of Sun-Vishnu.
 </p><p>
 ** What need, then, of etheric waves for the transmission of light,
 heat, etc., if <em>this </em>substance can pass through vacuum?
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 525 DR. RICHARDSON'S HERESY.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 loss of weight of such substance. . . . With this view as to the
 material nature of caloric or sun-force; with the impression firmly
 fixed on his mind that 'everything in Nature is composed of two
 descriptions of matter, the one essentially active and ethereal,
 the other passive and motionless,'* Metcalfe based the hypothesis
 that the Sun-force, or caloric, is a Self-active principle. For
 its own particles, he holds, it has repulsion; for the particles
 of all ponderable matter it has affinity; it attracts the particles
 of ponderable matter with forces which vary inversely as the squares
 of the distance. It thus acts <i>through </i>ponderable matter.
 If universal space were filled with caloric, sun-force, alone
 (without ponderable matter), caloric would also be inactive and
 would constitute a boundless Ocean of powerless or quiescent ether,
 because it would then have nothing on which to act, while ponderable
 matter, however inactive of itself, has 'certain properties by
 which it modifies and controls the actions of caloric, both of
 which are governed by immutable laws that have their origin in
 the mutual relations and specific properties of each.'
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "And he lays down a law which he believes is absolute, and
 which is thus expressed: --
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 " 'By the attraction of caloric for ponderable matter, it
 unites and holds together all things; by its self-repulsive energy
 it separates and expands all things.' "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This, of course, is almost the occult explanation of cohesion.
 Dr. Richardson continues: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "As I have already said, <i>the tendency of modern teaching
 is to rest upon the hypothesis </i>. . . <i>that heat is motion</i>,<i>
 </i>or, as it would, perhaps, be better stated, a specific force
 or form of motion.**
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "But this hypothesis, popular as it is, is not one that ought
 to be accepted to the exclusion of the simpler views of the material
 nature of sun-force, and of its influence in modifying the conditions
 of matter. <i>We do not yet know sufficient to be dogmatic.</i>"<i>***</i>
 
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 . . . "The hypothesis of Metcalfe respecting sun-force and
 earth-force is not only very simple, but most fascinating. . .
 . Here are two elements in the Universe, the one is ponderable
 matter . . . The second element is the all-pervading Ether, solar-fire.
 It is <i>without weight</i>,<i> substance</i>,<i> form</i>,<i>
 or colour; it is matter infinitely divisible</i>,<i> </i>and its
 particles repel each other; its rarity
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * And how can it be otherwise? Gross <em>ponderable </em>matter
 is the body, the Shell of matter or Substance, the female passive
 principle; and this <em>Fohatic </em>force is the second principle,
 <em>prana</em> -- the male and the active? On our globe this Substance
 is the second principle of the septenary <em>Element</em> -- Earth;
 in the atmosphere, it is that of <em>air</em>, which is the cosmic
 gross body; in the Sun it becomes the <em>Solar body </em>and
 that of the Seven rays; in sidereal space it corresponds with
 another principle, and so on. The whole is a homogeneous Unity
 alone, the parts are all differentiations.
 </p><p>
 ** Or the reverberation, and for sound, repercussion <em>on our
 plane </em>of that which is a perpetual motion of that <em>Substance
 </em>on higher planes. Our world and senses <em>are</em> victims
 of <em>Maya</em>,<em> </em>ceaselessly.
 </p><p>
 *** An honest admission, that.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 526 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 is such that we have no word, except ether,* by which to express
 it. It pervades and fills space, but alone it too is quiescent
 -- dead.** We bring together the two elements, the inert matter,
 the self-repulsive Ether (?) and thereupon dead (?) ponderable
 matter is vivified"; [<i>Ponderable matter may be inert but
 never dead</i> --<i> this is Occult Law.</i> --<i> </i>H.P.B.]
 . . . "through the particles of the ponderable substance
 the ether [<i>Ether</i>'<i>s second principle. </i>--<i> </i>H.P.B.]
 penetrates, and, so penetrating, it combines with the ponderable
 particles and holds them in mass, holds them together in bond
 of union; they are dissolved in the Ether."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "This distribution of solid ponderable matter through ether
 extends, according to the theory before us, to everything that
 exists at this moment. The ether is all-pervading. The human body
 itself is charged with the ether [<i>Say</i> <i>astral light.
 </i>--<i> </i>H.P.B.]; its minute particles are held together
 by it; the plant is in the same condition; the most solid earth,
 rock, adamant, crystal, metal, all are the same. But there are
 differences in the capacities of different kinds of ponderable
 matter to receive sun-force, and upon this depends the various
 changing conditions of matter; the solid, the liquid, the gaseous
 condition. Solid bodies have attracted caloric in excess over
 fluid bodies, and hence their firm<i> cohesion; </i>when a portion
 of molten zinc is poured upon a plate of solid zinc, the molten
 zinc becomes as solid because there is a rush of caloric from
 the liquid to the solid, and in the equalization the particles,
 previously loose or liquid, are more closely brought together.
 . . . Metcalfe himself, dwelling on the above-named phenomena,
 and accounting for them by the unity of principle of action, which
 has already been explained, sums up his argument in very clear
 terms, in a comment on the densities of various bodies. 'Hardness
 and softness' (he says), 'solidity and liquidity, are not essential
 conditions of bodies, but depend on the relative proportions of
 ethereal and ponderable matter of which they are composed. The
 most elastic gas may be reduced to the liquid form by the abstraction
 of caloric, and again converted into a firm solid, the particles
 of which would cling together with a force proportional to their
 augmented affinity for caloric. On the other hand, by adding a
 sufficient quantity of the same principle to the densest metals,
 their attraction for it is diminished when they are expanded into
 the gaseous state, and their cohesion is destroyed.' "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Having thus quoted at length the <em>heterodox </em>views of the
 great "heretic" -- views that need only a little alteration
 of terms here and there, the same eminent scientist -- an original
 and liberal thinker, undeniably -- proceeds to sum up those views,
 and continues: --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Yet it is not <em>Ether</em>,<em> </em>but only one of the principles
 of Ether, the latter being itself <em>one of the principles of
 Akasa.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** And so does <em>prana</em> (Jiva) pervade the whole living
 body of man; but alone, without having an atom to act upon, it
 would be <em>quiescent </em>--<em> </em>dead; <em>i.e.</em>, would
 be in <em>laya</em>, or as Mr. Crookes has it, "locked in
 <em>protyle</em>." It is the action of <em>Fohat </em>upon
 a compound or even a simple body that produces life. When a body
 dies it passes into the same polarity as its male energy and repels
 therefore the active agent, which, losing hold of the <em>whole</em>,
 fastens on the parts or molecules, this action being called chemical.
 Vishnu, the Preserver, transforms himself into Rudra-Siva, the
 Destroyer -- a correlation seemingly unknown to Science.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 527 WE DISAGREE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 "I shall not dwell at great length on this unity of sun-force
 and earth, which this theory implies. But I may add that out of
 it, or out of the hypothesis of mere motion as force, and of virtue
 without substance, we may gather, as the nearest possible approach
 to the truth on this, the most complex and profound of all subjects,
 the following inferences: --
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(<i>a</i>) Space, inter-stellary, inter-planetary, inter-material,
 inter-organic, is not a vacuum, but is filled with a subtle fluid
 or gas, which for want of a better term* we may still call, as
 the ancients did, <i>Aith</i>-<i>ur </i>--<i> </i>Solar fire,
 <strong>AE</strong>THER. This fluid, unchangeable in composition,
 indestructible, invisible,** pervades everything and all [<i>ponderable.
 </i>--<i> </i>H. P. B.] matter,*** the pebble in the running brook,
 the tree overhanging, the man looking on, is charged with the
 ether in various degree; the pebble less than the tree, the tree
 less than man. All in the planet is in like manner so charged!
 A world is built up in ethereal fluid, and moving through a sea
 of it.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(<i>b</i>) The Ether, whatever its nature is, is from the
 sun and from the suns**** the suns are the generators of it, the
 store-houses of it, the diffusers of it.*****
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(<i>c</i>.) Without the ether there could be no motion;
 without it particles of ponderable matter could not glide over
 each other; without it there could be no impulse to excite those
 particles into action.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(<i>d</i>.) Ether determines the constitution of bodies.
 Were there no ether there could be no change of constitution in
 substance; water, for instance, could only exist as a substance,
 compact and insoluble beyond any conception we could form of it.
 It could never even be ice, never flint, never vapour, except
 for ether.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "(<i>e</i>.) Ether connects sun with planet, planet with
 planet, man with planet, man with man. Without ether there could
 be no communication in the Universe; no light, no heat, no phenomenon
 of motion."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Thus we find that Ether and <em>elastic </em>atoms are, in the
 alleged <em>mechanical </em>conception of the Universe, the Spirit
 and Soul of Kosmos, and that the theory -- put it any way and
 under whatever disguise -- always leaves a more widely opened
 issue for men of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Verily, unless the occult terms of the Kabalists are adopted!
 </p><p>
 ** "Unchangeable" only during Manvantaric periods, after
 which it merges once more into Mulaprakriti; "invisible"
 for ever, in its own essence, but seen in its reflected coruscations,
 called the Astral light by the modern Kabalists. Yet, conscious
 and grand Beings clothed in that same Essence move in it.
 </p><p>
 *** One has to add (ponderable), to distinguish it from that <em>Ether</em>
 which is matter still, though a substratum.
 </p><p>
 **** The Occult Sciences reverse the statement, and say that it
 is the sun, and all the suns that are from <em>it</em>, which
 emanate at the Manvantaric dawn from the <em>Central Sun.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 ***** Here, we decidedly beg to differ with the learned gentleman.
 Let us remember that this AEther, whether <em>Akasa </em>is meant
 by the term, or its lower principle, Ether -- is septenary. <em>Akasa
 </em>is Aditi in the allegory, and the mother of Marttanda (the
 sun), the <em>Deva</em>-<em>matri </em>-- "Mother of the
 gods." In the solar system, the sun is her Buddhi and <em>Vahan</em>,<em>
 </em>the Vehicle, hence the 6th principle; in Kosmos all the suns
 are the Kama rupa of Akasa and so is ours. It is only when regarded
 as an individual Entity in his own Kingdom that Surya (the sun)
 is the 7th principle of the great body of <em>matter</em>.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 528 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Science to speculate beyond the line drawn by modern materialism
 -- or call it <em>agnosticism </em>rather, to be more correct*
 -- than the majority avails itself of. Atoms, Ether, or both,
 modern speculation cannot get out of the circle of ancient thought;
 and the latter was soaked through with archaic occultism. Undulatory
 or corpuscular theory -- it is all one. It is speculation from
 the aspects of phenomena, not from the knowledge of the essential
 nature of the <em>cause </em>and<em> causes. </em>When modern
 Science has explained to its audience the late achievements of
 Bunsen and Kirchoff, and shown the seven colours, the "primary"
 of a ray which is decomposed in a fixed order on a screen; and
 described the respective lengths of luminous waves, what has it
 proved? It has justified its reputation for <em>exactness </em>in
 mathematical achievement by measuring even the length of a luminous
 wave -- "varying from about seven hundred and sixty millionths
 of a millimetre at the red end of the spectrum to about three
 hundred and ninety-three millionths of a millimetre at the violet
 end." But when the exactness of the calculation with regard
 to the <em>effect </em>on the light-wave is thus vindicated, Science
 is forced to admit that the <em>force </em>(which is the <em>supposed
 cause</em>)<em> </em>is<em> believed </em>to produce "inconceivably
 minute undulations" in <em>some </em>medium -- "<em>generally
 regarded as identical with the ethereal medium</em>"** --<em>
 </em>and that medium itself is still only -- a "<em>hypothetical
 </em>agent!"
 </p><p>
 Auguste Comte's pessimism with respect to the impossibility of
 knowing some day the chemical composition of the sun, has not
 been belied thirty years later by Kirchoff, as claimed. The spectroscope
 has helped us to see that the elements, with which the modern
 chemist is familiar, <em>must in all probability </em>be present
 in the sun's outward robes -- <em>not in the sun itself; </em>and,
 taking these "robes," the solar cosmic veil, for the
 sun itself, the physicists have declared its luminosity to be
 due to <em>combustion </em>and <em>flame</em>,<em> </em>and have
 mistaken the vital principle of that luminary for a purely <em>material
 </em>thing, and called it "chromosphere."*** We have
 hypotheses and theories only so far, not law -- by any means.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Brutal but frank materialism is more honest than Janus-faced
 agnosticism in our days. <em>Monism </em>is the Pecksniff of modern
 philosophy, turning a pharisaical face to psychology and idealism,
 and its natural face of a Roman Augur, swelling his cheek with
 his tongue -- to Materialism. The Monists are worse than the Materialists;
 because, while looking at the Universe and psycho-spiritual man
 from the same negative stand-point, the latter put their case
 far less plausibly than sceptics of Mr. Tyndall's or even Mr.
 Huxley's stamp. Herbert Spencer, Bain and Lewes are more dangerous
 to universal truths than Buchner.
 </p><p>
 **<em> </em>"<em>Geology</em>,"<em> </em>by Professor
 A. Winchell.
 </p><p>
 *** See <em>Five Years of Theosophy </em>--<em> </em>Articles:<em>
 </em>"Do the Adepts deny the nebular theory?" and "Is
 the Sun merely a cooling mass?" -- for the true Occult teaching.
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-08.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>