<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 490 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>IV.<br>
 IS GRAVITATION A LAW?</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE corpuscular theory has been unceremoniously
 put aside; but gravitation -- the principle that all bodies attract
 each other with a force proportional directly to their masses,
 and inversely to the squares of the distances between them --
 survives to this day and reigns, supreme as ever, in the alleged
 ethereal waves of Space. As a hypothesis, it had been threatened
 with death for its inadequacy to embrace all the facts presented
 to it; as a <em>physical law</em>,<em> </em>it is the King of
 the late and once all-potent "Imponderables." "It
 is little short of blasphemy . . . . an insult to Newton's grand
 memory to doubt it, . . . ." is the exclamation of an American
 reviewer of "<em>Isis Unveiled.</em>" Well; what is
 finally that <em>invisible and intangible </em>God in whom we
 should believe on blind faith? Astronomers who see in gravitation
 an easy-going solution for many things, and an <em>universal </em>force
 which allows them to calculate thereby planetary motions, care
 little about the Cause of Attraction. They call Gravity a law,
 a <em>cause </em>in itself. We call the forces acting under that
 name <em>effects</em>,<em> </em>and very secondary effects, too.
 One day it will be found that the scientific hypothesis does not
 answer after all; and then it will follow the corpuscular theory
 of light and be consigned to rest for many scientific <em>aeons
 </em>in the archives of all exploded speculations. Has not Newton
 himself expressed grave doubts about the Nature of Force and the
 corporeality of the "Agents," as they were then called?
 So has Cuvier, another scientific light shining in the night of
 research. He warns his readers, in the <em>Revolution du Globe</em>,<em>
 </em>about the doubtful nature of the so-called Forces, saying
 that "it is not so sure whether those agents were not <em>Spiritual
 Powers </em>after all (<em>des agents spirituels</em>)<em>. At
 </em>the outset of his "Principia," Sir Isaac Newton
 took the greatest care to impress upon his school that he did
 not use the word "attraction" with regard to the mutual
 action of bodies in a physical sense. To him it was, he said,
 a purely mathematical conception involving no consideration of
 real and primary physical causes. In one of the passages of his
 "Principia" (<em>Defin</em>. 8,<em> B. I. Prop. </em>69,<em>
 </em>"<em>Scholium</em>"),<em> </em>he tells us plainly
 that, physically considered, attractions are rather <em>impulses.
 </em>In section XI. (<em>Introduction</em>)<em> </em>he expresses
 the opinion that "there <em>is some subtle spirit by the
 force and action of which </em>all movements of matter are determined"
 (see<em> Mod. Mater.</em>,<em> by Rev. W. F. Wilkinson</em>)<em>;
 </em>and in his third Letter to Bentley he says: "It is inconceivable
 that inanimate brute matter should, without the mediation of something
 else <em>which is not material</em>,<em> </em>operate upon and
 affect other matter, without mutual contact, as it must do if
 gravi- </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 491 GRAVITY OR WHAT?</h6>
 
 <p>
 tation, in the sense of Epicurus, be essential and inherent in
 it. . . . That gravity should be innate, inherent and essential
 to matter, so that one body may act upon another at a distance,
 through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else by and
 through which their action may be conveyed from one to another,
 is to me so great an absurdity that I believe no man, who has
 in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking, can
 ever fall into it. Gravity must be caused by an agent acting constantly
 according to certain laws; but <em>whether this agent </em>be
 <em>material or immaterial </em>I have left to the consideration
 of my readers."
 </p><p>
 At this, even Newton's contemporaries got frightened -- at the
 apparent return of <em>occult </em>causes into the domain of physics.
 Leibnitz called his principle of attraction "an incorporeal
 and inexplicable power." The supposition of an attractive
 faculty and a perfect <em>void </em>was characterized by Bernoulli
 as "revolting," the principle of <em>actio in distans
 </em>finding thus no more favour then than it does now. Euler,
 on the other hand, thought the action of gravity was due to either
 a <em>Spirit </em>or some subtle medium. And yet Newton knew of,
 if he did not accept, the Ether of the Ancients. He regarded the
 intermediate space between the sidereal bodies as <em>vacuum.
 </em>Therefore he believed in "subtle spirit" and <em>Spirits
 </em>as we do, guiding the so-called attraction. The above-quoted
 words of the great man have produced poor results. The "absurdity"
 has now become a dogma in the case of pure materialism, which
 repeats, "No matter without force, no force without matter;
 matter and force are inseparable, eternal and indestructible (true);
 there can be no independent force, since all force is <em>an inherent
 and necessary property of matter </em>(<em>false</em>)<em>; </em>consequently,
 <em>there is no immaterial </em>creative power." Oh, poor
 Sir Isaac!
 </p><p>
 If, leaving aside all the other eminent men of Science who shared
 in the same opinion as Euler and Leibnitz, the Occultists claim
 as their authorities and supporters only Sir Isaac Newton and
 Cuvier, as above cited, they need fear little from modern Science,
 and may loudly and proudly proclaim their beliefs. But, the hesitation
 and doubts of the two before cited authorities, and of many others,
 too, whom we could name, did not in the least prevent scientific
 speculation from wool-gathering on the fields of brute matter
 just as before. First it was matter and an imponderable fluid
 distinct from it; then came the <em>imponderable </em>fluid so
 much criticised by Grove; and AEther, which was at first<em> discontinuous
 </em>and then became continuous; after which came the "mechanical"
 Forces. These have now settled in life as "modes of motion"
 and the aether has become more mysterious and problematical than
 ever. More than one man of Science objects to such crude materialistic
 views. But then since the days of Plato, who repeatedly asks his
 readers not to confuse <em>incorporeal </em>Elements with</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 492 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 their <strong>P</strong>RINCIPLES -- transcendental or spiritual
 Elements; from those of the great Alchemists, who, like Paracelsus,
 made a great difference between phenomenon and its cause, or the
 Noumenon; and Grove, who, though he sees "no reason to divest
 universally diffused matter of the <em>functions </em>common to
 all matter," yet uses the term <em>Forces </em>where his
 critics, "who do not attach to the word any idea of a <em>specific
 action</em>,"<em> </em>say Force -- from those days to this
 nothing has proved competent to stem the tide of brutal materialism.
 Gravitation <em>is the sole cause</em>,<em> </em>the acting God,
 and matter is its prophet, said the men of science only a few
 years ago.
 </p><p>
 They have changed their views several times since then. But do
 the men of Science understand the innermost thought of Newton,
 one of the most spiritual-minded and religious men of his day,
 any better now than they did then? It is certainly to be doubted.
 Newton is credited with having given the death-blow to the Elemental
 Vortices of Descartes (the idea of Anaxagoras, resurrected, by-the-bye),
 though the last modern "vortical atoms" of Sir W. Thomson
 do not, in truth, differ much from the former. Nevertheless, when
 his disciple Forbes wrote in the <em>Preface </em>to the chief
 work of his Master a sentence declaring that "attraction
 was the <em>cause </em>of the System," Newton was the first
 to solemnly protest. That which in the mind of the great mathematician
 assumed the shadowy, but firmly rooted image of God, as the <em>noumenon
 </em>of all,* was called more philosophically by the ancient (and
 modern) philosophers and Occultists -- "Gods," or the
 <em>creative </em>fashioning Powers. The modes of expression may
 have been different, and the ideas more or less philosophically
 enunciated by all sacred and profane Antiquity; but the fundamental
 thought was the same.** For Pythagoras the Forces were Spiritual
 Entities, Gods inde-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<em>Attraction</em>,"<em> </em>Le Couturier, a materialist,
 writes, "has now become for the public that which it was
 for Newton himself -- a simple word, an <em>idea</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Panorama des Mondes</em>),<em> </em>since its cause
 is unknown. Herschell virtually says the same, when remarking,
 that whenever studying the motion of the heavenly bodies, and
 the phenomena of attraction, he feels penetrated at every moment
 with the idea of "the <em>existence of causes </em>that act
 for us under a veil, disguising <em>their direct </em>action<em>.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Musee des Sciences</em>,<em> </em>August, 1856.)
 </p><p>
 ** If we are taken to task for believing in operating "Gods"
 and "Spirits" while rejecting a <em>personal God</em>,<em>
 </em>we answer to the Theists and Monotheists: "Admit that
 your Jehovah is <em>one of the Elohim</em>,<em> </em>and we are
 ready to recognise him. Make of him, as you do, the Infinite,
 the ONE and the <em>Eternal </em>God, and we will never accept
 him in this character." Of <em>tribal </em>Gods there were
 many; the One Universal Deity is a principle, an abstract Root-Idea
 which has nought to do with the unclean work of finite Form. We
 do not worship the Gods, we only honour Them, as beings superior
 to ourselves. In this we obey the Mosaic injunction, while Christians
 <em>disobey </em>their Bible -- Missionaries foremost of all.
 "<em>Thou shalt not revile the gods</em>,"<em> </em>says
 one of them -- (Jehovah) -- in <em>Exodus xxii.</em> 28); but
 at the same time in verse 20 it is commanded, "He that sacrificeth
 to any God, save unto the Lord, he shall be utterly destroyed."
 Now in the [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 493 THE TRIPLE SIDEREAL FORCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 pendent of planets and Matter as we see and know them on Earth,
 who are the rulers of the Sidereal Heaven. Plato represented the
 planets as moved by an <em>intrinsic </em>Rector, one with his
 dwelling, like "A boatman in his boat." As for Aristotle,
 he called those rulers "<em>immaterial </em>substances;"*
 though as one who had never been initiated, he rejected the gods
 as <em>Entities </em>(<em>See Vossius</em>,<em> Vol. II.</em>,<em>
 p. </em>528). But this did not prevent him from recognising the
 fact that the stars and planets "were not inanimate masses
 but <em>acting and </em><i>living </i>bodies indeed. . . . . .
 ." As if "<em>sidereal spirits were the divine </em>portion
 of their phenomena, [[<em>ta theoitera pon phaneron</em>]]"
 (<em>De Caelo. I. </em>9).
 </p><p>
 If we look for corroboration in more modern and Scientific times,
 we find Tycho Brahe recognising in the stars a triple force, <em>divine</em>,<em>
 spiritual and vital. </em>Kepler, putting together the Pythagorean
 sentence, "The Sun, guardian of Jupiter," and the verses
 of David, "He placed his throne in the Sun," and "The
 Lord is the Sun," etc., said that he understood perfectly
 how the Pythagoreans could believe that all the globes disseminated
 through Space were rational Intelligences, <em>facultates ratiocinativae</em>,<em>
 </em>circulating around the Sun, "in which resides <em>a
 pure Spirit of fire; </em>the source of the general harmony"
 (<em>De Motibus planetarum harmonicis</em>,<em> p. </em>248).
 </p><p>
 When an Occultist speaks of Fohat -- the energising and guiding
 intelligence in the Universal Electric or <em>Vital </em>Fluid,
 -- he is laughed at. Withal, as now shown, neither the nature
 of electricity, nor of Life nor even of Light, are to this day
 understood. The Occultist sees in the manifestation of every force
 in Nature, the action of the quality, or the special characteristic
 of its noumenon; which <em>noumenon </em>is a distinct and intelligent
 Individuality <em>on the other side of the manifested mechanical
 Universe. </em>Now the Occultist does not deny -- on the contrary
 he will support the claim -- that light, heat, electricity and
 so on are <em>affections </em>(not properties or qualities) of
 matter. To put it more clearly: matter is the condition -- the
 necessary basis or vehicle, a <em>sine qua non</em> --<em> </em>for
 the manifestation of these forces, or agents, on this plane.
 </p><p>
 But in order to gain the point the Occultists have to examine
 the credentials of the law of gravity, first of all, of "Gravitation,
 the King
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] <em>original texts </em>it
 is not "god" but <em>Elohim</em>, --<em> </em>and we
 challenge contradiction -- and Jehovah is one of the Elohim, as
 proved by his own words in <em>Genesis iii.</em> 22, when "the
 Lord God said: Behold the Man has become <em>as one of us</em>,"<em>
 </em>etc. Hence both those who worship and sacrifice to the <em>Elohim</em>,<em>
 </em>the angels, and to Jehovah, those who <em>revile the gods
 </em>of their fellow-men, are far greater transgressors than the
 Occultists or any Theosophist. Meanwhile many of the latter prefer
 believing in some one "Lord" or other, and are quite
 welcome to do as they like.
 </p><p>
 * To liken the "immateriate species to <em>wooden iron</em>,"<em>
 </em>and laugh at Spiller referring to them as "incorporeal
 matter" does not solve the mystery (See "Concepts of
 Modern Physics," p. 165 <em>et infra</em>)<em>.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 494 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and Ruler of Matter," under every form. To do so effectually,
 the hypothesis in its earliest appearance has to be recalled to
 mind. To begin with, is it Newton who was the first to discover
 it? The <em>Athenaeum </em>of Jan. 26, 1867, has some curious
 information upon this subject. It says that "positive evidence
 can be adduced that Newton derived all his knowledge of gravitation
 and its laws from Boehme, <em>with whom gravitation or </em>ATTRACTION
 is the first property of Nature." . . . For with him "his
 (Boehme's) system, shows us the <em>inside </em>of things, while
 modern physical science is content with looking at the outside."
 Then again, "the science of electricity, which was not yet
 in existence when he (Boehme) wrote, is there anticipated (in
 his writings); and not only does Boehme describe all the now known
 phenomena of that force, but he even gives us the origin, generation,
 and birth of electricity, itself, etc."
 </p><p>
 Thus Newton, whose profound mind read easily between the lines,
 and fathomed the spiritual thought of the great Seer in its mystic
 rendering, owes his great discovery to Jacob Boehme, the nursling
 of the genii (Nirmanakayas) who watched over and guided him, of
 whom the author of the article in question so truly remarks, that
 "every new scientific discovery goes to prove <em>his profound
 and intuitive insight into the most secret workings of nature.</em>"
 And having <em>discovered </em>gravity, Newton, in order to render
 possible the action of attraction in space, had, so to speak,
 to <em>annihilate </em>every physical obstacle capable of impeding
 its free action; ether among others, though he had more than a
 presentiment of its existence. Advocating the corpuscular theory,
 he made an <em>absolute vacuum </em>between the heavenly bodies.
 . . . Whatever may have been his suspicions and <em>inner </em>convictions
 about Ether; however many friends he may have unbosomed himself
 to -- as in the case of his correspondence with Bentley -- his
 teachings never showed that he had any such belief. If he <i>was
 </i>"persuaded that the power of attraction could not be
 exerted by matter across a vacuum,"* how is it that so late
 as 1860, French astronomers (Le Couturier, for instance), combated
 "the <em>disastrous </em>results of the theory of vacuum
 established by the great man?"** Professor Winchell writes,
 "These passages (letter to Bentley) show what were his views
 respecting the nature of the interplanetary medium of communication.
 Though declaring that the heavens '<em>are void of sensible matter</em>,'<em>
 </em>he elsewhere excepted '<em>perhaps</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * World-Life. Prof. Winchell, <b>LL.D</b> (pp. 49 and 50).
 </p><p>
 ** "Il n'est plus possible aujourd'hui, <em>de soutenir comme
 Newton</em>,<em> </em>que les corps celestes se mouvent au milieu
 du VIDE immense des espaces. . . . Parmi les consequences de la
 <em>theorie du vide etablie </em>par ce grand homme, il ne reste
 plus debout <em>que le mot </em>'<em>attraction</em>,'<em> </em>et
 nous verrons le jour ou ce dernier mot disparaitra du vocabulaire
 scientifique." ("<em>Panorama des mondes</em>,"<em>
 </em>pp. 47 <em>and </em>53<em>.</em>) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 495 NEWTON THEN AND NEWTON NOW.</h6>
 
 <p>
 some very thin vapours, streams, and effluvia, arising from the
 atmospheres of the earth, planets, and comets, and from such an
 exceedingly rare ethereal medium as we have elsewhere described."
 (<em>Newton</em>,<em> Optics</em>,<em> III.</em>,<em> query </em>28,
 1704; <em>quoted in </em>"<em>World-Life.</em>")
 </p><p>
 This only shows that even such great men as Newton have not always
 the courage of their opinions. Dr. T. S. Hunt "called attention
 to some long-neglected passages in Newton's works, from which
 it appears that a belief in such universal, intercosmical medium
 gradually took root in his mind." (<em>Ibid.</em>)<em> </em>But
 such attention was never called to the said passages before Nov.
 28, 1881, when Dr. Hunt read his "<em>Celestial Chemistry</em>,<em>
 from the time of Newton.</em>"<em> </em>"Till then the
 idea was universal, even among the men of Science, that Newton
 had, while advocating the corpuscular theory, preached <em>a void</em>,"<em>
 </em>as Le Couturier says. The passages had been "long neglected,"
 no doubt because they contradicted and clashed with the preconceived
 pet theories of the day, till finally the undulatory theory imperiously
 required the presence of an "ethereal medium" to explain
 it. This is the whole secret.
 </p><p>
 Anyhow, it is from that theory of Newton's of a universal void
 -- <em>taught</em>,<em> </em>if not believed in by himself, --
 that dates the immense scorn now shown by modern for ancient physics.
 The old sages had maintained that "Nature abhorred vacuum,"
 and the greatest mathematicians of the world (read of the Western
 races) had discovered the antiquated "fallacy" and exposed
 it. And now modern science vindicates, however ungracefully, archaic
 knowledge, having, moreover, to vindicate Newton's character and
 powers of observation at this late hour, after having neglected
 for one century and a half to pay any attention to such very important
 passages -- perchance, because it was wiser not to attract any
 notice to them. Better late than never.
 </p><p>
 And now Father AEther is <em>re-welcomed </em>with open arms;
 and wedded to gravitation; linked to it for weal or woe, until
 the day when it, or both, shall be replaced by something else.
 Three hundred years ago it was<em> plenum </em>everywhere, then
 it became one dismal <em>vacuity; </em>later still the sidereal
 ocean-beds, dried up by science, rolled onward once more their
 ethereal waves. <em>Recede ut procedes </em>must become the motto
 of exact Science -- "exact," chiefly, in finding itself
 inexact every leap-year.
 </p><p>
 But we will not quarrel with the great men. They had to go back
 to the earliest "Gods of Pythagoras and old Kanada"
 for the very backbone and marrow of their correlations and "newest"
 discoveries, and this may well afford good hope to the Occultists,
 for their minor gods. For we believe in Le Couturier's prophecy
 about gravitation. We know the day is approaching when an <em>absolute
 reform </em>will be demanded in the present modes of Science by
 the scientists themselves -- as was done by Sir W. Grove, <b>F.R.S</b>.
 Till that day there is nothing to be done. For if gravitation
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 496 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 were dethroned to-morrow, the day after the Scientists would discover
 some other new mode of mechanical motion.* Rough and up-hill is
 the path of true Science, and its days are full of vexation of
 Spirit. But in the face of its "thousand" contradictory
 hypotheses to explain physical phenomena, there never was yet
 a better one than that of "motion" -- however paradoxically
 interpreted by materialism. As may be found on the first pages
 of Book I., Occultists have nothing surely against <em>motion</em>**
 the GREAT BREATH of Mr. Herbert Spencer's "UNKNOWN."
 But, believing that everything on Earth is the <em>shadow </em>of
 something in <em>space</em> --<em> </em>they believe <em>in smaller
 </em>"Breaths," which, living, intelligent and independent
 of all but Law, blow in every direction during Manvantaric periods.
 These Science will reject. But whatever replaces attraction, <em>alias</em>
 gravitation, the result will be the same. Science will be as far
 from the solution of its difficulties as it is now, unless it
 comes to some compromise with Occultism and even with Alchemy
 -- which supposition will be regarded as an impertinence, but
 remains a fact, nevertheless. As Faye says: "<em>Il manque
 quelque chose aux geologues pour faire la geologie de la Lune</em>,<em>
 c</em>'<em>est d</em>'<em>etre astronomes. A la verite il manque
 aussi quelquechose aux astronomes pour aborder avec fruit cette
 etude</em>,<em> c</em>'<em>est d</em>'<em>etre geologues.</em>"<em>
 </em>But he might have added, with still more pointedness, "<em>Ce
 qui manque a tous les deux</em>,<em> c</em>'<em>est l</em>'<em>intuition
 du mystique.</em>"
 </p><p>
 Let us remember Sir William Grove's wise "concluding remarks,"
 on the ultimate structure of matter, or the minutiae of molecular
 actions, which, he thought, man will never know.
 </p><blockquote>
 "Much harm has already been done by attempting hypothetically
 to dissect matter and to discuss the shapes, sizes, and numbers
 of atoms, and their atmospheres of heat, ether, or electricity.
 . . . . Whether the regarding electricity, light, magnetism, etc.,
 as simply motions of ordinary matter, be or be not admissible,
 certain it is that all past theories have resolved, and all existing
 theories do resolve, the action of these forces into motion. Whether
 it be that, on account of our familiarity with motion, we refer
 other affections to it, as to a language which is most easily
 construed, and most capable of
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * When read in a fair and unprejudiced spirit, Sir Isaac Newton's
 works are an ever ready witness to show how he must have hesitated
 between gravitation and attraction, impulse and some other <em>unknown
 cause </em>to explain the regular course of the planetary motion.
 But see <em>Treatise on Colour </em>(Vol. III., question 31.)
 We are told by Herschell that Newton left with his successors
 the duty of drawing all the scientific conclusions from his discovery.
 How modern Science abused the privilege of building its newest
 theories upon the law of gravitation, may be realised when one
 remembers how profoundly religious was that great man.
 </p><p>
 ** The materialistic notion that because, in physics real or sensible
 motion is impossible in pure space or <em>vacuum</em>, therefore,
 the eternal MOTION of and in Cosmos (regarded as infinite Space)
 is a <em>fiction </em>-- only shows once more that such words
 as "pure space," "pure Being," "the Absolute,"
 etc., of Eastern metaphysics have never been understood in the
 West.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 497 NEW BOTTLES FOR OLD WINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 explaining them, or whether it be that it is in reality the only
 mode in which <em>our minds </em>as<em> contra-distinguished from
 our senses</em>,<em> </em>are able <em>to conceive material agencies</em>,<em>
 </em>certain it is that since the period at which the mystic notions
 of spiritual or preternatural powers were applied to account for
 physical phenomena, all hypotheses framed to explain them have
 resolved them into MOTION."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 And then the learned gentleman states a purely occult tenet: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The term perpetual motion, which I have not infrequently
 used in these pages, is itself equivocal. If the doctrines here
 advanced be well founded, <i>all</i> <i>motion is</i>,<i> in one
 sense</i>,<i> perpetual. </i>In masses, whose motion is stopped
 by mutual concussion, heat or motion of the particles is generated;
 and thus the motion continues, so that if we could venture to
 extend such thoughts to the universe, we should assume the same
 amount of motion affecting the same amount of matter for ever."*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Thus, supposing attraction or gravitation should be given up in
 favour of the Sun being a <em>huge magnet </em>-- which is a theory
 already accepted by some physicists -- a magnet that acts on the
 planets as attraction is now supposed to do, whereto, or how much
 farther would it lead the astronomers from where they are now?
 Not an inch farther. Kepler came to this "curious hypothesis"
 nearly 300 years ago. He had not discovered the theory of attraction
 and repulsion in Kosmos, for it was known from the days of Empedocles,
 the two opposite forces being called by him "hate" and
 "love" -- which comes to the same thing. But Kepler
 gave a pretty fair description of cosmic magnetism. That such
 magnetism exists in nature, is as certain as that gravitation
 does not; not at any rate, in the way in which it is taught by
 Science, which never took into consideration the different modes
 in which the dual Force -- that Occultism calls attraction and
 repulsion -- may act within our solar system, the earth's atmosphere,
 and <em>beyond </em>in the Kosmos.** This was proven by Newton
 himself; for there are many phenomena in our
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<em>Correl. Phys. Forces</em>,"<em> </em>p. 173.
 This is precisely what Occultism maintains, and on the same principle
 that "where force is made to oppose force, and produce static
 equilibrium, the balance of pre-existing equilibrium is affected,
 and <em>fresh motion is started </em>equivalent to that which
 is withdrawn into a state of abeyance." This process finds
 intervals in the pralaya, but is eternal and ceaseless as <em>the
 </em>"Breath," even when the manifested Kosmos rests.
 </p><p>
 ** "Trans-solar space," writes the great Humboldt, "does
 not hitherto show any phenomenon analogous to our solar system.
 It is a peculiarity of <em>our</em> System, that matter should
 have condensed within it in nebulous rings, the nuclei of which
 condense into earths and moons. I say again, heretofore, <em>nothing
 of the kind has</em> <em>ever been observed beyond our planetary
 system.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>See Revue Germanique of the</em>
 <em>31st Dec. 1860</em><i>,</i><em> art. </em>"<em>Lettres
 et conversations d</em>'<em>Alexandre Humboldt.</em>")<em>
 </em>True, that since 1860 the nebular theory has sprung up, and
 being better known, a few identical phenomena were <em>supposed
 </em>to be observed beyond the solar system. Yet the great man
 is quite right; and no <em>earths </em>or<em> moons </em>can be
 found -- <em>except in appearance</em> --<em> </em>beyond, or
 of the same order of matter as found in our system. Such is the
 Occult teaching.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 498 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Solar system, which he confessed his inability to explain by the
 law of gravitation. "Such were the uniformity in the directions
 of planetary movements, the nearly circular forms of the orbits,
 and their remarkable conformity to one plane" (<em>Prof.
 Winchell</em>)<em>. </em>And if there is one single exception,
 then the law of gravitation has no right to be referred to as
 an <em>universal law. </em>"These adjustments," we are
 told, "Newton, in his general Scholium, pronounces to be
 'the work of an intelligent and all-powerful Being.' " Intelligent
 that "Being" may be; as to "all-powerful"
 there would be every reason to doubt the claim. A poor "God"
 he, who would work upon minor details and leave the most important
 to secondary forces! The poverty of the argument and logic in
 this case, is surpassed only by that of Laplace, who, seeking
 very correctly to substitute motion for Newton's "all-powerful
 Being," and ignorant of the true nature of that eternal motion,
 saw in it a blind physical law. "Might not those arrangements
 be an effect of the laws of motion?" he asks, forgetting,
 as all our modern Scientists do, that this<i> law </i>and this
 motion are a vicious circle, so long as the <em>nature of both
 </em>remains unexplained. His famous answer to Napoleon: "<em>Dieu
 est devenu une hypothese inutile</em>,"<em> </em>would be
 correctly stated only by one who adhered to the philosophy of
 the Vedantins. It becomes a pure fallacy, if we exclude the interference
 of operating, intelligent, powerful (never "<em>all-powerful</em>")<em>
 </em>Beings, who are called "gods."
 </p><p>
 But we would ask the critics of the mediaeval astronomers why
 should Kepler be denounced as <em>most unscientific</em>,<em>
 </em>for offering just the same solution as Newton did -- only
 showing himself more sincere, more consistent and even more logical.
 Where may be the difference between Newton's "all-powerful
 Being" and Kepler's <em>Rectores</em>,<em> </em>his sidereal
 and Cosmic Forces, or Angels? Kepler is again criticised for his
 "curious hypothesis which made use of a vortical movement
 within the solar system;" for his theories in general, for
 his favouring Empedocles' idea of attraction and repulsion, and
 "Solar magnetism" in particular. Yet several modern
 men of Science, as will be shown -- Hunt (if Metcalfe is to be
 excluded), Dr. Richardson, etc. -- favour the idea very seriously.
 He is half excused, however, on the plea that "to the time
 of Kepler no interaction between masses of matter had been distinctly
 recognized which was <em>generically </em>different from magnetism"
 (<em>World-Life</em>)<em>.</em> Is it<em> distinctly</em> recognised
 now? Does Prof. Winchell claim for Science any serious knowledge
 whatever of the natures of either electricity or magnetism --
 except that <em>both seem to be the effects of some result arising
 from an undetermined cause.</em> 
 </p><p>
 The ideas of Kepler, weeded from their theological tendencies,
 are purely occult. He saw that:</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 499 CHRONIC NEGATION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (I.) The Sun is a great Magnet.* This is what some eminent modern
 scientists and also the Occultists believe in.
 </p><p>
 (II.) The Solar substance is immaterial.** (<i>See</i> "<em>Isis
 Unveiled</em>,"<em> Vol. I.</em> <em>pp. </em>270<em> to
 </em>271.)
 </p><p>
 (III.) He provided, for the constant motion and restoration of
 the Sun's energy and planetary motion, the perpetual care of a
 spirit, or spirits. The whole of Antiquity believed in this idea.
 The Occultists do not use the word Spirit, but say <em>Creative
 </em>Forces, which they <em>endow with intelligence. </em>But
 we may call them spirits also.
 </p><p>
 This theory is tabooed a great deal more on account of the "Spirit"
 that is given room in it, than of anything else. Herschell, the
 elder, believed in it likewise, and so do several modern scientists
 also. Nevertheless Professor Winchell declares that "a hypothesis
 more fanciful, and less in accord with the requirements of physical
 principles, has not been offered in ancient or modern times."
 (<em>World-Life</em>,<em> p. </em>554.)
 </p><p>
 The same was said, once upon a time, of the universal Ether, and
 now it is not only accepted perforce but advocated <em>as the
 only possible theory </em>to explain away certain mysteries.
 </p><p>
 Grove's ideas, when he first enunciated them in London about 1840,
 were called as <em>unscientific </em>as the above; nevertheless,
 <i>his</i> views on the correlation of forces are now universally
 accepted. It would, very likely, require one more conversant with
 science than is the writer, to combat with any success some of
 the now prevailing ideas about gravitation and other similar "solutions"
 of Cosmic Mysteries. But, let us recall a few objections that
 came from recognized men of Science; from astronomers and physicists
 of eminence, who rejected the theory of rotation, as well as that
 of gravitation. Thus one reads in the <em>French Encyclopaedia
 </em>that<em> </em>"Science agrees, in the face of all its
 representatives, that it is <em>impossible </em>to explain the
 <em>physical </em>origin of the rotatory motion of the solar system."
 </p><p>
 If the question is asked, "what causes rotation?" we
 are answered: "It is the centrifugal Force." "And
 this force, what is it that produces it?" "The force
 of rotation," is the grave answer. (<em>Godefroy</em>,<em>
 Cosmogonie de la Revelation.***</em>)<em> </em>It will be well,
 perhaps, to examine both these theories as being directly or indirectly
 connected.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * But see <em>Astronomie du Moyen Age</em>,<em> </em>by Delambre.
 </p><p>
 ** In the sense, of course, of matter existing in states unknown
 to Science.
 </p><p>
 *** We shall be taken to task for contradiction. It will be said
 that while we deny <em>God</em>,<em> </em>we admit Souls and <em>operative
 Spirits</em>,<em> </em>and quote from Roman Catholic bigoted writers
 in support of our argument. To this we reply: "We deny the
 <em>anthropomorphic </em>god of the Monotheists, but never the
 Divine Principle in nature. We combat Protestants and Roman Catholics
 on a number of dogmatic theological beliefs of human and sectarian
 origin. We agree with them in their belief in Spirits and <em>intelligent</em>
 operative powers, though we do not worship "Angels"
 as the Roman Latinists do." </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-05.htm">Next Section</a>
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>