<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 634 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 [[This page continued from <a href="sd1-3-15.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>XVI.<br>
 CYCLIC EVOLUTION AND KARMA.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>I</strong>T is the Spiritual evolution of the <em>inner</em>,<em>
 </em>immortal man that forms the fundamental tenet in the Occult
 Sciences. To realize even distantly such a process, the student
 has to believe (<em>a</em>) in the ONE Universal Life, independent
 of matter (or what Science regards as matter); and (<em>b</em>)
 in the individual intelligences that animate the various manifestations
 of this Principle. Mr. Huxley does not believe in "Vital
 Force," others do. Dr. J. H. Hutchinson Sterling's work "Concerning
 Protoplasm" has made no small havoc of this dogmatic negation.
 Professor Beale's decision is also in favour of a Vital Principle;
 and Dr. B. W. Richardson's lectures on the "Nervous Ether,"
 have been sufficiently quoted from. Thus, opinions are divided.
 </p><p>
 The ONE LIFE is closely related to <em>the one </em>law which
 governs the World of Being -- <strong>K</strong>ARMA. Exoterically,
 this is simply and literally "action," or rather an
 "effect-producing cause." Esoterically it is quite a
 different thing in its far-fetching moral effects. It is the unerring
 <strong>L</strong>AW OF <strong>R</strong>ETRIBUTION. To say to
 those ignorant of the real significance, characteristics and awful
 importance of this eternal immutable law, that no theological
 definition of a personal deity can give an idea of this impersonal,
 yet ever present and active Principle, is to speak in vain. Nor
 can it be called Providence. For Providence, with the Theists
 (the Christian Protestants, at any rate), rejoices in a personal
 male gender, while with the Roman Catholics it is a female potency,
 "Divine Providence tempers His blessings to secure their
 better effects," Wogan tells us. Indeed "He" tempers
 them, which Karma -- a sexless principle -- does not.
 </p><p>
 Throughout the first two Parts, it was shown that, at the first
 flutter</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 635 THE ROOTS AND CAUSES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of renascent life, Svabhavat, "the mutable radiance of the
 Immutable Darkness unconscious in Eternity," passes, at every
 new rebirth of Kosmos, from an inactive state into one of intense
 activity; that it differentiates, and then begins its work through
 that differentiation. This work is <strong>K</strong>ARMA.
 </p><p>
 The Cycles are also subservient to the effects produced by this
 activity. "The one Cosmic atom becomes seven atoms on the
 plane of matter, and each is transformed into a centre of energy;
 that same atom becomes seven rays on the plane of spirit, and
 the seven creative forces of nature, radiating from the root-essence
 . . . . follow, one the right, the other the left path, separate
 till the end of the Kalpa, and yet are in close embrace. What
 unites them? <strong>K</strong>ARMA." The atoms emanated
 from the Central Point emanate in their turn new centres of energy,
 which, under the potential breath of <em>Fohat</em>,<em> </em>begin
 their work from within without, and multiply other minor centres.
 These, in the course of evolution and involution, form in their
 turn the roots or developing causes of new effects, from worlds
 and "man-bearing" globes, down to the genera, species,
 and classes of all the <em>seven </em>kingdoms* (of which <em>we
 know only four</em>)<em>. </em>For "the blessed workers have
 received the <em>Thyan</em>-<em>kam</em>,<em> </em>in the eternity"
 (Book of "The Aphorisms of <em>Tson</em>-<em>ka</em>-<em>pa</em>")<em>.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 "Thyan-kam" is the power or knowledge of guiding the
 impulses of cosmic energy in the right direction.
 </p><p>
 The true Buddhist, recognising no "personal god," nor
 any "Father" and<em> </em>"<em>Creator </em>of
 Heaven and Earth," still believes in an <em>absolute consciousness</em>,<em>
 </em>"Adi-Buddhi"; and the Buddhist philosopher <em>knows
 </em>that there are Planetary Spirits, the "Dhyan Chohans."
 But though he admits of "spiritual lives," yet, as they
 are temporary in eternity, even they, according to his philosophy,
 are "the <em>maya </em>of the <em>day</em>," the<em>
 illusion </em>of a "day of Brahma," a short manvantara
 of 4,320,000,000 years. The "Yin-Sin" is not for the
 speculations of men, for the Lord Buddha has strongly prohibited
 all such inquiry. If the Dhyan Chohans and all the invisible Beings
 -- the <em>Seven </em>Centres and their direct Emanations, the
 <em>minor </em>centres of Energy -- are the direct reflex of the
 <strong>O</strong>NE Light, yet men are far removed from these,
 since the whole of the <em>visible </em>Kosmos consists of "<em>self</em>-<em>produced
 </em>beings, the creatures of <em>Karma.</em>"<em> </em>Thus
 regarding a personal God "as only a gigantic shadow thrown
 upon the void of space by the imagination of ignorant men,"**
 they teach that only "two things are (objectively) eternal,
 namely <em>Akasa </em>and<em> Nirvana</em>";<em> </em>and
 that these are ONE in reality, and but a <em>maya </em>when divided.
 "Buddhists deny creation and cannot conceive of a <em>Creator.</em>"<em>
 </em>"Everything has come out of Akasa (or Svabhavat
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Vide Stanza <b>VI</b>. (Book I.) and Commentary.
 </p><p>
 **<em> Buddhist Catechism</em>,<em> </em>by H. S. Olcott, President
 of the Theosophical Society.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 636 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 on our earth) in obedience to a law of motion inherent in it,
 and after a certain existence passes away. Nothing ever came out
 of nothing." (<em>Buddhist Catechism.</em>)
 </p><p>
 If a Vedantic Brahmin of the Adwaita Sect, when asked whether
 he believes in the existence of God, is always likely to answer,
 as Jacolliot was answered -- "I am myself 'God';" a
 Buddhist (a Sinhalese especially) would simply laugh, and say
 in reply, "There is no God; no Creation." Yet the root
 philosophy of both Adwaita and Buddhist scholars is <em>identical</em>,<em>
 </em>and both have the same respect for animal life, for both
 believe that every creature on earth, however small and humble,
 "is an immortal portion of the immortal matter" -- for
 matter with them has quite another significance than it has with
 either Christian or materialist -- and that every creature is
 subject to Karma.
 </p><p>
 The answer of the Brahmin is one which would suggest itself to
 every ancient philosopher, Kabalist, and Gnostic of the early
 days. It contains the very spirit of the Delphic and Kabalistic
 commandments, for esoteric philosophy solved, ages ago, the problem
 of what man <em>was</em>,<em> is</em>,<em> </em>and <em>will be;
 </em>of man's origin, life-cycle -- interminable in its duration
 of successive incarnations or rebirths -- and finally of his absorption
 into the source from which he started.
 </p><p>
 But it is not physical Science that we can ever ask to read man
 for us, as the riddle of the Past, or that of the Future; since
 no philosopher is able to tell us even what man is, as he is known
 both to physiology and psychology. In doubt whether man was "a
 god or beast," he is now connected with the latter and derived
 from an animal. No doubt that the care of analyzing and classifying
 the human being as a <em>terrestrial animal </em>may be left to
 Science, which occultists -- of all men -- regard with veneration
 and respect. They recognize its ground and the wonderful work
 done by it, the progress achieved in physiology, and even -- to
 a degree -- in biology. But man's <em>inner</em>,<em> </em>spiritual,
 psychic, or even moral, nature cannot be left to the tender mercies
 of an ingrained materialism; for not even the higher psychological
 philosophy of the West is able, in its present incompleteness
 and tendency towards a decided agnosticism, to do justice to the
 inner; especially to his higher capacities and perceptions, and
 those states of consciousness, across the road to which such authorities
 as Mill draw a strong line, saying "So far, and no farther
 shalt thou go."
 </p><p>
 No Occultist would deny that man -- no less than the elephant
 and the microbe, the crocodile and the lizard, the blade of grass
 or the crystal -- is, in his physical formation, the simple product
 of the evolutionary forces of nature through a numberless series
 of transformations; but he puts the case differently.
 </p><p>
 It is not against zoological and anthropological discoveries,
 based on</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 637 THE SWING OF KARMA.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the fossils of man and animal, that every mystic and believer
 in a divine soul inwardly revolts, but only against the uncalled-for
 conclusions built on preconceived theories and made to fit in
 with certain prejudices. Their premises may or may not be always
 true; and as some of these theories live but a short life, the
 deductions therefrom must ever be one-sided with materialistic
 evolutionists. Yet it is on the strength of such very ephemeral
 authority, that most of the men of science frequently receive
 undue honours where they deserve them the least.*
 </p><p>
 To make the working of Karma, in the periodical renovations of
 the Universe, more evident and intelligible to the student when
 he arrives at the origin and evolution of man, he has now to examine
 with us the esoteric bearing of the Karmic Cycles upon Universal
 Ethics. The question is, do those mysterious divisions of time,
 called Yugas and Kalpas by the Hindus, and so very graphically
 -- [[<em>Kuklos</em>]] -- "cycle," ring or circle, by
 the Greeks, have any bearing upon, or any direct connection with,
 human life? Even exoteric philosophy explains that these perpetual
 circles of time are ever returning on themselves, periodically,
 and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * We refer those who would regard the statement as an impertinence
 or <em>irreverence </em>against accepted Science, to Mr. James
 Hutchinson Stirling's work concerning "Protoplasm,"
 which is a defence of a <em>vital</em> Principle <em>versus </em>the
 Molecularists -- Huxley, Tyndall, Vogt, and Co. -- and request
 them to examine whether it is true or not to say that the scientific
 premises may not be always correct, but that they are accepted,
 nevertheless, to fill up a gap or a hole in some beloved materialistic
 hobby. Speaking of protoplasm and the organs of man, as "viewed
 by Mr. Huxley," the author says: "Probably then, in
 regard to any continuity in protoplasm of power, of form, or of
 substance, we have seen <em>lacunae</em> enow. Nay, Mr. Huxley
 himself can be adduced in evidence on the same side. <em>Not rarely
 do we find in his essay admissions </em>of PROBABILITY, <em>where
 it is </em>CERTAINTY <em>that is alone in place. </em>He says,
 for example: 'It is more than probable that <em>when</em> the
 vegetable world is thoroughly explored we <em>shall </em>find
 all plants in possession of the same powers.' When <em>a conclusion
 is decidedly announced</em>,<em> </em>it is rather disappointing
 to be told, as here, that <em>the premisses are still to collect</em>'<em>
 (!!)</em> . . . . . Again, here is a passage in which he is seen
 to cut his own '<em>basis</em>'<em> </em>from beneath his own
 feet. After telling us that all forms of protoplasm consist of
 carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen 'in very complex union,'
 he continues: 'To this complex combination, <em>the nature of
 which has never been determined with exactness (!!)</em>, the
 name of <em>protein </em>has been applied.' This, plainly, is
 an identification, on Mr. Huxley's own part, of protoplasm and
 protein; and what is said of one, being necessarily true of the
 other, it follows that he admits the nature of protoplasm never
 to have been determined with exactness, and that even in his eyes
 the <em>lis </em>is still <em>sub judice. </em>This admission
 is strengthened by the words, too, 'If we use this term -- <em>protein
 </em>--<em> </em>with such <em>caution </em>as may properly arise
 out of our <em>comparative ignorance </em>of the things for which
 it stands . . . etc., etc. (p. 33 and 34, in reply to Mr. Huxley
 in "Yeast").
 </p><p>
 This is the eminent Huxley, the king of physiology and biology,
 who is proven playing at blind man's buff with <em>premisses </em>and<em>
 facts. </em>What may not the "smaller fry" of science
 do after this!</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 638 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 intelligently in Space and Eternity. There are "Cycles of
 matter"* and there are "Cycles of Spiritual evolution."
 Racial, national, and individual cycles. May not esoteric speculation
 allow us a still deeper insight into the workings of these?
 </p><p>
 This idea is beautifully expressed in a very clever scientific
 work: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The possibility of rising to a comprehension of a system
 of co-ordination so far outreaching in time and space all reach
 of human observations, is a circumstance which signalizes the
 power of man to transcend the limitations of changing and inconsistent
 matter, and assert his superiority over all unstable and perishable
 forms of being. <i>There is a method in the succession of events</i>,<i>
 </i>and in the relation of co-existent things, which the mind
 of man seizes hold of; and by means of this as a clue, he runs
 back or forward over aeons of material history of which human
 experience can never testify. Events germinate and unfold. They
 have a past which is connected with their present, and we feel
 a well-justified confidence that a future is appointed which will
 be similarly connected with the present and the past. This continuity
 and unity of history repeat themselves before our eyes in all
 conceivable stages of progress. The phenomena furnish us the grounds
 for the generalization of two laws which are truly <i>principles
 of scientific divination</i>,<i> </i>by which alone the human
 mind penetrates the sealed records of the past and the unopened
 pages of the future. The first of these is the law of evolution,
 or, to phrase it for our purpose, <i>the law of correlated successiveness
 or organized history in the individual</i>,<i> </i>illustrated
 in the changing phases of every single maturing system of results.
 . . . These thoughts summon into our immediate presence the measureless
 past and the measureless future of material history. They seem
 almost to open vistas through infinity, and to endow the human
 intellect with an existence and a vision exempt from the limitations
 of time and space and finite causation, and lift it up toward
 a sublime apprehension of the Supreme Intelligence whose dwelling
 place is Eternity." ("World-Life," p. 535 and 548.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 According to the teachings, Maya, or the illusive appearance of
 the marshalling of events and actions on this earth, changes,
 varying with nations and places. But the chief features of one's
 life are always in accordance with the "Constellation"
 one is born under, or, we should say, with the characteristics
 of its animating principle or the deity that presides over it,
 whether we call it a <em>Dhyan Chohan</em>,<em> </em>as in Asia,
 or an Archangel, as with the Greek and Latin churches. In ancient
 Symbolism it was always the <strong>S</strong>UN (though the Spiritual,
 not the visible, Sun was meant), that was supposed to send forth
 the chief Saviours and Avatars. Hence the connecting link between
 the Buddhas, the Avatars, and so many other incarnations of the
 highest <strong>S</strong>EVEN. The closer the approach to one's<em>
 Prototype</em>,<em> </em>"in Heaven," the better for
 the mortal whose personality was chosen, by his own <em>personal
 </em>deity (the seventh principle), as its terrestrial abode.
 For, with every effort of will toward purification and unity
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "The Cycles of Matter," a name given by Professor
 Winchell to an Essay of his written in 1860.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 639 THE NETWORK OF DESTINY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 with that "Self-god," one of the lower rays breaks and
 the spiritual entity of man is drawn higher and ever higher to
 the ray that supersedes the first, until, from ray to ray, the
 inner man is drawn into the one and highest beam of the Parent-<strong>S</strong>UN.
 Thus, "the events of humanity <em>do </em>run coordinately
 with the number forms," since the single units of that humanity
 proceed one and all from the same source -- the <em>central</em>
 and its <em>shadow</em>,<em> </em>the visible <strong>S</strong>UN.
 For the equinoxes and solstices, the periods and various phases
 of the Solar course, astronomically and numerically expressed,
 are only the concrete symbols of the eternally living verity,
 though they do seem <em>abstract ideas </em>to uninitiated mortals.
 And this explains the extraordinary numerical coincidences with
 geometrical relations, as shown by several authors.
 </p><p>
 Yes; "our destiny <em>is </em>written in the stars!"
 Only, the closer the union between the mortal reflection MAN and
 his celestial PROTOTYPE, the less dangerous the external conditions
 and subsequent reincarnations -- which neither Buddhas nor Christs
 can escape. This is not superstition, least of all is it <em>Fatalism.
 </em>The latter implies a blind course of some still blinder power,
 and man is a free agent during his stay on earth. He cannot escape
 his <em>ruling </em>Destiny, but he has the choice of two paths
 that lead him in that direction, and he can reach the goal of
 misery -- if such is decreed to him, either in the snowy white
 robes of the Martyr, or in the soiled garments of a volunteer
 in the iniquitous course; for, there are <em>external and internal
 conditions </em>which affect the determination of our will upon
 our actions, and it is in our power to follow either of the two.
 Those who believe in <em>Karma </em>have to believe in<em> destiny</em>,<em>
 </em>which, from birth to death, every man is weaving thread by
 thread around himself, as a spider does his cobweb; and this destiny
 is guided either by the heavenly voice of the invisible <em>prototype</em>
 outside of us, or by our more intimate <em>astral</em>,<em> </em>or
 inner man, who is but too often the evil genius of the embodied
 entity called man. Both these lead on the outward man, but one
 of them must prevail; and from the very beginning of the invisible
 affray the stern and implacable <em>law of compensation </em>steps
 in and takes its course, faithfully following the fluctuations.
 When the last strand is woven, and man is seemingly enwrapped
 in the net-work of his own doing, then he finds himself completely
 under the empire of this <em>self</em>-<em>made </em>destiny.
 It then either fixes him like the inert shell against the immovable
 rock, or carries him away like a feather in a whirlwind raised
 by his own actions, and this is -- <strong>K</strong>ARMA.
 </p><p>
 A materialist, treating upon the periodical creations of our globe,
 has expressed it in one sentence. "The whole <em>past </em>of
 the Earth is nothing but an unfolded <em>present.</em>"<em>
 </em>This was Buchner, who little suspected that he was repeating
 an axiom of the Occultists. It is quite true also, as Burmeister
 (quoted in "<em>Force and matter</em>")<em> </em>remarks,
 that</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 640 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "the historical investigation of the development of the Earth
 has proved that <em>now and then </em>rest upon the same base;
 that the past has been developed in the same manner as the present
 rolls on; and that the Forces which were in action ever remained
 the same."
 </p><p>
 The "Forces" -- their <em>noumena </em>rather -- are
 the same, of course; therefore, the phenomenal Forces must be
 the same also. But how can any one feel so sure that the attributes
 of matter have not altered under the hand of Protean Evolution?
 How can any materialist assert with such confidence, as is done
 by Rossmassler, that "this eternal conformity in the essence
 of phenomena renders it certain that fire and water possessed
 <em>at all times </em>the same powers and ever will possess them?"
 Who are they "that darken counsel with words without knowledge,"
 and where were the Huxleys and Buchners when the foundations of
 the earth were laid by the great Law? It is a fundamental principle
 of the Occult philosophy, this same homogeneity of matter and
 immutability of natural laws, which are so much insisted upon
 by materialism; but that unity rests upon the inseparability of
 Spirit from matter, and, if the two are once divorced, the whole
 Kosmos would fall back into chaos and non-being. Therefore, it
 is absolutely <em>false</em>,<em> </em>and but an additional demonstration
 of the great conceit of our age, to assert (as men of science
 do) that all the great geological changes and terrible convulsions
 have been produced <em>by</em> <em>ordinary and known physical
 forces. </em>For these forces were but the tools and final means
 for the accomplishment of certain purposes, acting periodically,
 and apparently mechanically, through an inward impulse mixed up
 with, but beyond their material nature. There is a purpose in
 every important act of Nature, whose acts are all cyclic and periodical.
 But spiritual Forces having been usually confused with the purely
 physical, the former are denied by, and therefore, have to remain
 unknown to Science, because left unexamined.*
 </p><blockquote>
 "The history of the World begins with its general aim,"
 says Hegel; "the realization of the Idea of Spirit -- only
 in an <i>implicit </i>form (<i>an sich</i>),<i> </i>that is, as
 Nature; a hidden, most profoundly hidden unconscious instinct,
 and the whole process of History . . . is directed to rendering
 this unconscious impulse a conscious one. Thus appearing in the
 form of merely natural existence, natural will -- that which has
 been called the subjective side -- physical craving, instinct,
 passion, private interest, as also opinion and subjective conception
 -- spontaneously present themselves at the very commencement.
 <i>This vast congeries of volitions</i>,<i> interests and activities
 constitute the instruments and means of the</i> WORLD
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Men of science will say: We deny, because nothing of the kind
 has ever come within the scope of our experience. But, as argued
 by Charles Richet, the physiologist: "So be it, but have
 you at least demonstrated the contrary? . . . Do not, at any rate,
 deny <em>a priori. </em>Actual Science <em>is not sufficiently
 advanced to give you such right.</em>"<em> </em>("La
 suggestion mentale et le calcul des probabilites.")</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 641 CYCLIC WHEELS WITHIN WHEELS.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 SPIRIT <i>for attaining its object; </i>bringing it to consciousness
 and realising it. And this aim is none other than finding itself
 -- coming to itself -- and contemplating itself in concrete actuality.
 But that those manifestations of vitality on the part of individuals
 and peoples, in which they seek and satisfy their own purposes,
 are at the same time <i>the means and instruments of a higher
 power</i>,<i> of a higher and broader purpose of which they know
 nothing </i>--<i> </i>which they realise unconsciously -- might
 be made a matter of question; rather has been questioned . . .
 on this point I announced my view at the very outset, and asserted
 our hypothesis . . . and our belief <i>that Reason governs the
 World and has consequently governed its history. </i>In relation
 to this independently universal and substantial existence -- all
 else is subordinate, subservient to it, and the means for its
 development."*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 No metaphysician or theosophist could demur to these truths, which
 are all embodied in esoteric teachings. There <em>is </em>a predestination
 in the geological life of our globe, as in the history, past and
 future, of races and nations. This is closely connected with what
 we call <em>Karma </em>and Western Pantheists, "Nemesis"
 and "Cycles." The law of evolution is now carrying us
 along the ascending arc of <em>our </em>cycle,<em> when the effects
 will be once more re</em>-<em>merged into</em>,<em> </em>and re-become
 the (now neutralized) causes, and all things affected by the former
 will have regained their original harmony. This will be the cycle
 of our special "Round," a moment in the duration of
 the great cycle, or the <em>Mahayuga.</em> 
 </p><p>
 The fine philosophical remarks of Hegel are found to have their
 application in the teachings of Occult Science, which shows nature
 ever acting with a given purpose, whose results are always dual.
 This was stated in our first Occult volumes, in <em>Isis Unveiled</em>,<em>
 </em>p. 268, Vol. II., in the following words: --
 </p><blockquote>
 As our planet revolves once every year around the sun, and at
 the same time turns once in every twenty-four hours upon its own
 axis, thus traversing minor circles within a larger one, so is
 the work of the smaller cyclic periods accomplished and recommenced,
 within the Great Saros.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The revolution of the physical world, according to the ancient
 doctrine, is attended by a like revolution in the world of intellect
 -- the spiritual evolution of the world proceeding in cycles,
 like the physical one.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 Thus we see in history a regular alternation of ebb and flow in
 the tide of human progress. The great kingdoms and empires of
 the world, after reaching the culmination of their greatness,
 descend again, in accordance with the same law by which they ascended;
 till, having reached the lowest point, humanity reasserts itself
 and mounts up once more, the height of its attainment being, by
 this law of ascending progression by cycles, somewhat higher than
 the point from which it had before descended.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 But these cycles -- wheels within wheels, so comprehensively and
 ingeniously symbolized by the various Manus and Rishis in India,
 and by the Kabiri in the West** -- <em>do not affect all mankind
 at one and the same</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "On World History" in "Philosophy of History,"
 p. 26. (Sibree's Eng. Transl.).
 </p><p>
 ** This symbolism does not prevent these now seemingly mythic
 personages from [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 642 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>time </em>--<em> </em>as explained in the <em>Racial division
 of Cycles </em>(<em>See sub</em>-<em>section </em>6.) Hence, as
 we see, the difficulty of comprehending, and discriminating between
 them, with regard to their physical and spiritual effects, without
 having thoroughly mastered their relations with, and action upon
 the respective positions of nations and races, in their destiny
 and evolution. This system cannot be comprehended if the spiritual
 action of these periods<em> </em>--<em> pre</em>-<em>ordained</em>,<em>
 </em>so to say, by Karmic law --is separated from their physical
 course. The calculations of the best astrologers would fail, or
 at any rate remain imperfect, unless this dual action is thoroughly
 taken into consideration and dealt with upon these lines. And
 this mastery can be achieved only through INITIATION.
 </p><p>
 The Grand Cycle includes the progress of mankind from the appearance
 of primordial man of ethereal form. It runs through the inner
 cycles of his (man's) progressive evolution from the ethereal
 down to the semi-ethereal and purely physical: down to the redemption
 of man from his<em> coat of skin </em>and matter, after which
 it continues running its course downward and then upward again,
 to meet at the culmination of a Round, when the manvantaric "Serpent
 swallows its tail" and seven minor cycles are passed. These
 are the great Racial Cycles which affect equally all the nations
 and tribes included in that special Race; but there are minor
 and national as well as tribal cycles within those, which run
 independently of each other. They are called in the Eastern esotericism
 the <em>Karmic </em>cycles. In the West, since Pagan Wisdom has
 been repudiated as having grown from and been developed by the
 dark powers supposed to be at constant war and in opposition to
 the little tribal Jehovah -- the full and awful significance of
 the Greek <strong>N</strong>EMESIS (or Karma) has been entirely
 forgotten. Otherwise Christians would have better realized the
 profound truth that Nemesis is without attributes; that while
 the dreaded goddess is absolute and immutable as a Principle,
 it is we ourselves -- nations and individuals -- who propel her
 to action and give the impulse to its direction. <strong>K</strong>ARMA-<strong>N</strong>EMESIS
 is the creator of nations and mortals, but once created, it is
 they who make of her either a fury or a rewarding Angel. Yea --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Wise are they who worship Nemesis"*
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] having ruled the earth
 once upon a time under the human form of actual living, though
 truly divine and god-like man. The opinion of Colonel Vallancey
 (and also of Count de Gobelin) that the <em>names of the Kabiri
 appear to be all allegorical</em>,<em> </em>and to have signified
 no more (?) than an almanac of the vicissitudes of the seasons
 -- calculated for the operations of agriculture" (<em>Collect.
 de Reb. Hibern.</em>, No. 13, <em>Praef. </em>Sect. 5) is as absurd
 as his assertion that OEon, Kronos, Saturn and Dagon are all one,
 namely, the "patriarch Adam." The Kabiri were the instructors
 of mankind in agriculture, because they were the<em> regents </em>over
 the seasons and Cosmic cycles. Hence it was they who regulated,
 as planetary Spirits or "Angels" (messengers), the <em>mysteries
 </em>of the <em>art</em> of agriculture.
 </p><p>
 * Who <em>dread</em> Karma-Nemesis would be better.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 643 KARMA-NEMESIS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 -- as the <em>chorus </em>tells Prometheus. And as unwise they,
 who believe that the goddess may be propitiated by whatever sacrifices
 and prayers, or have her wheel diverted from the path it has once
 taken. "The triform Fates and ever mindful Furies" are
 her attributes only on earth, and begotten by ourselves. There
 is no return from the paths she cycles over; yet those paths are
 of our own making, for it is we, collectively or individually,
 who prepare them. Karma-Nemesis is the synonym of <b>P</b>ROVIDENCE,
 minus <em>design</em>, goodness, and every other <em>finite </em>attribute
 and qualification, so unphilosophically attributed to the latter.
 An Occultist or a philosopher will not speak of the goodness or
 cruelty of Providence; but, identifying it with Karma-Nemesis,
 he will teach that nevertheless it guards the good and watches
 over them in this, as in future lives; and that it punishes the
 evil-doer -- aye, even to his seventh rebirth. So long, in short,
 as the effect of his having thrown into perturbation even the
 smallest atom in the Infinite World of harmony, has not been finally
 readjusted. For the only decree of Karma -- an eternal and immutable
 decree -- is absolute Harmony in the world of matter as it is
 in the world of Spirit. It is not, therefore, Karma that rewards
 or punishes, but it is we, who reward or punish ourselves according
 to whether we work with, through and along with nature, abiding
 by the laws on which that Harmony depends, or -- break them.
 </p><p>
 Nor would the ways of Karma be inscrutable were men to work in
 union and harmony, instead of disunion and strife. For our ignorance
 of those ways -- which one portion of mankind calls the ways of
 Providence, dark and intricate; while another sees in them the
 action of blind Fatalism; and a third, simple chance, with neither
 gods nor devils to guide them -- would surely disappear, if we
 would but attribute all these to their correct cause. With right
 knowledge, or at any rate with a confident conviction that our
 neighbours will no more work to hurt us than we would think of
 harming them, the two-thirds of the World's evil would vanish
 into thin air. Were no man to hurt his brother, Karma-Nemesis
 would have neither cause to work for, nor weapons to act through.
 It is the constant presence in our midst of every element of strife
 and opposition, and the division of races, nations, tribes, societies
 and individuals into Cains and Abels, wolves and lambs, that is
 the chief cause of the "ways of Providence." We cut
 these numerous windings in our destinies daily with our own hands,
 while we imagine that we are pursuing a track on the royal high
 road of respectability and duty, and then complain of those ways
 being so intricate and so dark. We stand bewildered before the
 mystery of our own making, and the riddles of life that <em>we
 will not </em>solve, and then accuse the great Sphinx of devouring
 us. But verily there is not an accident in our lives,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 644 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 not a misshapen day, or a misfortune, that could not be traced
 back to our own doings in this or in another life. If one breaks
 the laws of Harmony, or, as a theosophical writer expresses it,
 "the laws of life," one must be prepared to fall into
 the chaos one has oneself produced. For, according to the same
 writer, "the only conclusion one can come to is that these
 laws of life are their own avengers; and consequently that every
 avenging Angel is only a typified representation of their re-action."
 </p><p>
 Therefore, if any one is helpless before these immutable laws,
 it is not ourselves, the artificers of our destinies, but rather
 those angels, the guardians of harmony. Karma-Nemesis is no more
 than the (spiritual) dynamical effect of causes produced and forces
 awakened into activity by our own actions. It is a law of occult
 dynamics that "a given amount of energy expended on the spiritual
 or astral plane is productive of far greater results than the
 same amount expended on the physical objective plane of existence."
 </p><p>
 This state will last till man's spiritual intuitions are fully
 opened, which will not happen before we fairly cast off our thick
 coats of matter; until we begin acting from <em>within</em>,<em>
 </em>instead of ever following impulses from <em>without; </em>namely,
 those produced by our physical senses and gross selfish body.
 Until then the only palliative to the evils of life is union and
 harmony -- a Brotherhood IN ACTU, and <em>altruism </em>not simply
 in name. The suppression of one single bad <em>cause </em>will
 suppress not one, but a variety of bad effects. And if a Brotherhood
 or even a number of Brotherhoods may not be able to prevent nations
 from occasionally cutting each other's throats -- still unity
 in thought and action, and philosophical research into the mysteries
 of being, will always prevent some, while trying to comprehend
 that which has hitherto remained to them a riddle, from creating
 additional causes in a world already so full of woe and evil.
 Knowledge of Karma gives the conviction that if --
 </p><blockquote>
 ". . . . virtue in distress, and vice in triumph<br>
 Make atheists of mankind,"*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 it is only because that mankind has ever shut its eyes to the
 great truth that man is himself his own saviour as his own destroyer.
 That he need not accuse Heaven and the gods, Fates and Providence,
 of the apparent injustice that reigns in the midst of humanity.
 But let him rather remember and repeat this bit of Grecian wisdom,
 which warns man to forbear accusing <em>That </em>which --
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>
 "Just, though mysterious, leads us on unerring<br>
 Through ways unmark'd from guilt to punishment . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 -- which are now the ways and the high road on which move onward
 the great European nations. The Western Aryans had, every nation
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Dryden.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 645 ANCIENT AND MODERN PROPHECIES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and tribe, like their Eastern brethren of the Fifth Race, their
 Golden and their Iron ages, their period of comparative irresponsibility,
 or the Satya age of purity, while now, several of them have reached
 their Iron Age, the <em>Kali-Yuga</em>,<em> </em>an age <strong>B</strong>LACK
 WITH <strong>H</strong>ORRORS. . . . .
 </p><p>
 It is true, on the other hand, that the exoteric cycles of every
 nation have been correctly made to be derived from, and depend
 on, sidereal motions. The latter are inseparably blended with
 the destinies of nations and men. But in their purely physical
 sense, Europe knows of no other cycles than the astronomical,
 and makes its computations accordingly. Nor will it hear of any
 other than <em>imaginary </em>circles or circuits in the starry
 heavens that gird them --
 </p><blockquote>
 "With centric and eccentric scribbled o'er<br>
 Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 But with the pagans, with whom, as Coleridge has it -- ".
 . . . . Time, cyclical time, was their abstraction of the Deity
 . ." that "Deity" manifesting co-ordinately with,
 and only through Karma, and being that KARMA-NEMESIS itself, the
 cycles meant something more than a mere succession of events,
 or a periodical space of time of more or less prolonged duration.
 For they were generally marked with recurrences of a more varied
 and intellectual character than are exhibited in the periodical
 return of seasons or of certain constellations. Modern wisdom
 is satisfied with astronomical computations and prophecies based
 on unerring mathematical laws. Ancient Wisdom added to the cold
 shell of astronomy the vivifying elements of its soul and spirit
 -- ASTROLOGY. And, as the sidereal motions <em>do</em> regulate
 and determine other events on Earth -- besides potatoes and the
 periodical disease of that useful vegetable -- (a statement which,
 not being amenable to scientific explanation, is merely derided,
 while accepted) -- those events have to be allowed to find themselves
 predetermined by even simple astronomical computations. Believers
 in astrology will understand our meaning, sceptics will laugh
 at the belief and mock the idea. Thus they shut their eyes, ostrich-like,
 to their own fate. . . . . . .*
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Not all, however, for there are men of Science awakening to
 truth. This is what we read: "Whatever way we turn our eyes
 we encounter a mystery . . . . all in Nature for us is <em>the
 unknown</em>. . . Yet they are numerous, those superficial minds
 for whom nothing can be produced by natural forces outside of
 facts observed long ago, consecrated in books and grouped more
 or less skilfully with the help of theories whose ephemeral duration
 ought, by this time, to have demonstrated their insufficiency,
 . . . . I do not pretend <em>to contest the possibility of invisible
 Beings</em>,<em> of a nature different from ours and susceptible
 of moving matter to action. </em>Profound philosophers have admitted
 it in all epochs as a consequence of the great law of continuity
 which rules the Universe. That intellectual life, which we see
 starting in some way from non-being (<em>neant</em>) and gradually
 reaching man, can it stop abruptly at man to reappear only in
 the infinite, in the sovereign regulator of the world? This is
 little probable." Therefore . . "I [[Footnote continued
 on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 646 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This because their little <em>historical </em>period, so called,
 allows them no margin for comparison. Sidereal heaven is before
 them; and though their spiritual vision is still unopened and
 the atmospheric dust of terrestrial origin seals their sight and
 chains it to the limits of physical systems, still they do not
 fail to perceive the movements and note the behaviour of meteors
 and comets. They record the periodical advents of those wanderers
 and "flaming messengers," and prophesy, in consequence,
 earthquakes, meteoric showers, the apparition of certain stars,
 comets, etc., etc. Are they soothsayers for all that? No, they
 are learned astronomers.
 </p><p>
 Why, then, should occultists and astrologers, as learned, be disbelieved,
 when they prophesy the return of some cyclic event on the same
 mathematical principle? Why should the claim that they <em>know
 it </em>be ridiculed? Their forefathers and predecessors, having
 recorded the recurrence of such events in their time and day,
 throughout a period embracing hundreds of thousands of years,
 the conjunction of the same constellations must necessarily produce,
 if not quite the same, at any rate, similar effects. Are the prophecies
 derided, because of the claim of the hundreds of thousands of
 years of observation, and the millions of years of the human races?
 In its turn modern Science is laughed at for its far more modest
 geological and anthropological figures, by those who hold to Biblical
 chronology. Thus Karma adjusts even human laughter at the mutual
 expense of sects, learned societies, and individuals. Yet in the
 prognostication of <em>such </em>future events, at any rate, all
 foretold on the authority of cyclic recurrences, there is no psychic
 phenomenon involved. It is neither <em>prevision</em>,<em> nor
 prophecy; </em>no more than is the signalling of a comet or star,
 several years before its appearance. It is simply knowledge and
 mathematically correct computations which enable the <strong>W</strong>ISE
 <strong>M</strong>EN OF THE <strong>E</strong>AST to foretell,
 for instance, that England is on the eve of such or another catastrophe;
 France, nearing such a point of her cycle, and Europe in general
 threatened with, or rather, on the eve of, a cataclysm, which
 her own cycle of racial <em>Karma has led her </em>to. The reliability
 of the information depends, of course, on the acceptation or rejection
 of the claim for a tremendous period of historical observation.
 Eastern Initiates maintain that they have preserved records of
 the racial development and of events of universal import ever
 since the beginning of the Fourth Race -- that which preceded
 being traditional. Moreover, those who believe in Seership and
 Occult
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] no more deny the existence
 of Spirits than I deny soul while trying to explain certain facts
 without their hypothesis . . ." "The Non-Defined Forces,"
 Historical and Experimental Researches, p. 3. The above is written
 by A. de Rochas, a well-known man of science in France, his work
 being one of the signs of the time. (Paris: Masson, Boulevard
 St. Germain, 1887.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 647 ASTROLOGY A SCIENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 powers will have no difficulty in crediting the general character,
 at least, of the information given, even if traditional, once
 the latter is checked and corrected by the corroboration of clairvoyance
 and esoteric knowledge. But in the present case no such metaphysical
 belief is claimed as our chief dependence, but a proof is given
 on what, to every Occultist, is quite scientific evidence -- the
 records preserved through the <em>Zodiac </em>for incalculable
 ages.
 </p><p>
 It is now amply proved that even horoscopes and judiciary astrology
 are not quite based on a fiction, and that stars and constellations,
 consequently, have an occult and mysterious influence on, and
 connection with, individuals. And if with the latter, why not
 with nations, races, and mankind in bulk? This, again, is a claim
 made on the authority of the Zodiacal records. We shall examine
 then, if you please, how far the Zodiac was known to the ancients,
 and how far it is forgotten by the moderns.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-17.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>