<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 213 THE CREATIVE POWERS.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA VII.</h4>
 
 <p>
 1. <strong>B</strong>EHOLD THE BEGINNING OF SENTIENT FORMLESS
 LIFE (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 <strong>F</strong>IRST, THE DIVINE (<em>vehicle</em>)<em> </em>(<em>b</em>),<em>
 </em>THE ONE FROM THE MOTHER-SPIRIT (<em>Atman</em>)<em>; </em>THEN
 THE <strong>S</strong>PIRITUAL -- (<em>Atma-Buddhi</em>,<em> Spirit-soul</em>)<em>*
 </em>(<em>c</em>); (<em>again</em>)<em> </em>THE THREE FROM THE
 ONE (<i>d</i>), THE FOUR FROM THE ONE (<em>e</em>),<em> </em>AND
 THE FIVE (f), FROM WHICH THE THREE, THE FIVE AND THE SEVEN (<i>g</i>)
 -- THESE ARE THE THREE-FOLD AND THE FOUR-FOLD DOWNWARD; THE "MIND-BORN
 SONS OF THE FIRST <strong>L</strong>ORD (<em>Avalokiteswara</em>)<em>
 </em>THE <strong>S</strong>HINING <strong>S</strong>EVEN (<em>the
 </em>"<em>Builders</em>")<em>.</em>** <strong>I</strong>T
 IS THEY WHO ARE THOU, ME, HIM, <strong>O</strong> <strong>L</strong>ANOO;
 THEY WHO WATCH OVER THEE AND THY MOTHER, <strong>B</strong>HUMI
 (<em>the</em> <em>Earth</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The hierarchy of Creative Powers is divided into
 seven (or 4 and 3) esoteric, within the twelve great Orders, recorded
 in the twelve signs of the Zodiac; the seven of the manifesting
 scale being connected, moreover, with the Seven Planets. All this
 is subdivided into numberless groups of divine Spiritual, semi-Spiritual,
 and ethereal Beings.
 </p><p>
 The Chief Hierarchies among these are hinted at in the great Quaternary,
 or the "four bodies and the three faculties" of Brahma
 exoterically, and the Panchasyam, the five Brahmas, or the five
 Dhyani-Buddhas in the Buddhist system.
 </p><p>
 The highest group is composed of the divine Flames, so-called,
 also spoken of as the "Fiery Lions" and the "Lions
 of Life," whose esotericism is securely hidden in the Zodiacal
 sign of Leo. It is the <em>nucleole </em>of the superior divine
 World (see <em>Commentary </em>in first pages of Addendum). They
 are the formless Fiery Breaths, identical in one aspect with the
 upper Sephirothal <strong>T</strong>RIAD, which is placed by the
 Kabalists in the "Archetypal World."
 </p><p>
 The same hierarchy, with the same numbers, is found in the Japanese
 system, in the "Beginnings" as taught by both the Shinto
 and the Buddhist sects. In this system, Anthropogenesis precedes
 Cosmogenesis, as the Divine merges into the human, and creates
 --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This relates to the Cosmic principles.
 </p><p>
 ** The seven creative Rishis now connected with the constellation
 of the Great Bear </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 214 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 midway in its descent into matter -- the visible Universe. The
 legendary personages -- remarks reverentially Omoie -- "having
 to be understood as the stereotyped embodiment of the higher (secret)
 doctrine, and its sublime truths." To state it at full length,
 however, would occupy too much of our space, but a few words on
 this old system cannot be out of place. The following is a short
 synopsis of this Anthropo-Cosmogenesis, and it shows how closely
 the most separated notions echoed one and the same Archaic teaching.
 </p><p>
 When all was as yet Chaos (<em>Kon-ton</em>)<em> </em>three spiritual
 Beings appeared on the stage of future creation: (1) <em>Ame no
 ani naka nushi no Kami</em>,<em> </em>"Divine Monarch of
 the Central Heaven"; (2)<em> Taka mi onosubi no Kami</em>,<em>
 </em>"Exalted, imperial Divine offspring of Heaven and the
 Earth"; and (3)<em> Kamu mi musubi no Kami</em>,<em> </em>"Offspring
 of the Gods," simply.
 </p><p>
 These were without form or substance (our <em>arupa </em>triad),
 as neither the celestial nor the terrestrial substance had yet
 differentiated, "nor had the essence of things been formed."
 </p><p>
 In the Zohar -- which, as now arranged and re-edited by Moses
 de Leon, with the help of Syrian and Chaldean Christian Gnostics
 in the XIIth century, and corrected and revised still later by
 many Christian hands, is only a little less exoteric than the
 Bible itself -- this divine "Vehicle" no longer appears
 as it does in the "Chaldean Book of Numbers." True enough,
 Ain-Soph, the <strong>A</strong>BSOLUTE <strong>E</strong>NDLESS
 <strong>N</strong>O-THING, uses also the form of the <strong>O</strong>NE,
 the manifested "Heavenly man" (the FIRST CAUSE) as its
 chariot (<em>Mercabah</em>,<em> </em>in Hebrew; <em>Vahan</em>,<em>
 </em>in Sanskrit) or vehicle to descend into, and manifest through,
 in the phenomenal world. But the Kabalists neither make it plain
 how the <strong>A</strong>BSOLUTE can use anything, or exercise
 any attribute whatever, since, as the Absolute, it is devoid of
 attributes; nor do they explain that in reality it is the First
 Cause (Plato's<em> Logos</em>)<em> </em>the original and eternal
 IDEA, that manifests through Adam Kadmon, the <em>Second </em>Logos,
 so to speak. In the "Book of Numbers" it is explained
 that <strong>E</strong>N (or <em>Ain</em>,<em> </em>Aior) is the
 only self-existent, whereas its "Depth"<em> </em>(<em>Bythos</em>
 or<em> Buthon </em>of the Gnostics, called <em>Propator</em>)<em>
 </em>is only periodical. The latter is Brahm as differentiated
 from Brahma or Parabrahm. It is the Depth, the Source of Light,
 or Propator, which is the <em>unmanifested </em>Logos or the abstract
 <em>Idea</em>, and not Ain-Soph, <em>whose ray </em>uses Adam-Kadmon
 or the <em>manifested </em>Logos (the objective Universe) "male
 and female" -- as a chariot through which to manifest. But
 in the Zohar we read the following incongruity: "<em>Senior</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 215 ONE PARENT FLAME, COUNTLESS FLAMES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>occultatus est et absconditus; Microprosopus manifestus est</em>,<em>
 et non manifestus.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Rosenroth; Liber Mysterii</em>,<em>
 </em>IV<em>.</em>,<em> </em>1.) This is a fallacy, since <em>Microprosopus
 </em>or the <em>microcosm</em>,<em> </em>can only exist during
 its manifestations, and is destroyed during the Maha-Pralayas.
 Rosenroth's Kabala is no guide, but very often a puzzle.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>As in the Japanese system, in the Egyptian,
 and every old cosmogony -- at this divine FLAME, The "One,"
 are lit the three descending groups. Having their potential being
 in the higher group, they now become distinct and separate Entities.
 These are called the "Virgins of Life," the "Great
 Illusion," etc., etc., and collectively the "Six-pointed
 Star." The latter is the symbol, in almost every religion,
 of the <em>Logos </em>as the first emanation. It is that of Vishnu
 in India (the <em>Chakra</em>,<em> </em>or wheel), and the glyph
 of the Tetragrammaton, the "He of the four letters"
 or -- metaphorically -- "the limbs of Microprosopos"
 in the Kabala, which are ten and six respectively. The later Kabalists
 however, especially the Christian mystics, have played sad havoc
 with this magnificent symbol.* For the "<i>ten</i> limbs"
 of the Heavenly Man are the ten Sephiroth; but the first Heavenly
 Man is the unmanifested Spirit of the Universe, and ought never
 to be degraded into Microprosopus -- the lesser Face or Countenance,
 the prototype of man on the terrestrial plane.** Of this, however,
 later on. The six-pointed Star refers to the six Forces or Powers
 of Nature, the six planes, principles, etc., etc., all synthesized
 by the seventh, or the central point in the Star. All these, the
 upper and lower hierarchies included, emanate from the "Heavenly
 or Celestial Virgin,"*** the great mother in all religions,
 the Androgyne, the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Indeed, the Microprosopus -- who is, philosophically speaking,
 quite distinct from the unmanifested eternal Logos "one with
 the Father," -- has been finally brought, by centuries of
 incessant efforts, of sophistry and paradoxes, to be considered
 as one with Jehovah, or the ONE living God (!), whereas Jehovah
 is no better than Binah, a female Sephiroth. This fact cannot
 be too frequently impressed upon the reader.
 </p><p>
 ** The Microprosopus is, as just said, the Logos manifested, and
 of such there are many.
 </p><p>
 *** Sephira is the Crown, KETHER, in the abstract principle only,
 as a mathematical<em> x </em>(the unknown quantity). On the plane
 of differentiated nature she is the female counterpart of Adam
 Kadmon -- the first Androgyne. The Kabala teaches that the word
 "<em>Fiat Lux</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Genesis </em>ch. i.)
 referred to the formation and evolution of the Sephiroth, and
 not to light as opposed to darkness. Rabbi Simeon says: "Oh
 com- [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 216 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 Sephira-Adam-Kadmon. In its <em>Unity</em>,<em> </em>primordial
 light is the seventh, or highest, principle, <em>Daivi-prakriti</em>,<em>
 </em>the light of the unmanifested Logos. But in its differentiation
 it becomes <em>Fohat</em>,<em> </em>or the "Seven Sons."
 The former is symbolised by the Central point in the double-Triangle;
 the latter by the hexagon itself, or the "six limbs"
 of the Microprosopus the Seventh being Malkuth, the "Bride"
 of the Christian Kabalists, or our Earth. Hence the expressions:
 </p><p>
 "<em>The first after the </em>'<em>One</em>'<em> is divine
 Fire; the second</em>,<em> Fire and AEther; the third is composed
 of Fire</em>,<em> AEther and Water; the fourth of Fire</em>,<em>
 AEther</em>,<em> Water</em>,<em> and Air.</em>"<em>* The
 One is not concerned with Man-bearing globes</em>,<em> but with
 the inner invisible Spheres. </em>"<em>The </em>'<em>First-Born</em>'<em>
 are the </em><strong>L</strong>IFE, <em>the heart and pulse of
 the Universe; the Second are its </em><strong>M</strong>IND <em>or
 Consciousness</em>,"<em>**</em> 
 </p><p>
 as said in the Commentary.
 </p><p>
 (<em>c</em>) The second Order of Celestial Beings, those of Fire
 and AEther (corresponding to Spirit and Soul, or the Atma-Buddhi)
 whose names are legion, are still formless, but more definitely
 "substantial." They are the first differentiation in
 the Secondary Evolution or "Creation" -- a misleading
 word. As the name shows, they are the prototypes of the incarnating
 Jivas or Monads, and are composed of the Fiery Spirit of Life.
 It is through these that passes, like a pure solar beam, the ray
 which is furnished by them with its future vehicle, the Divine
 Soul, Buddhi. These are directly concerned with the Hosts of the
 higher world of <em>our </em>system. From these twofold <em>Units
 </em>emanate the <em>threefold.</em> 
 </p><p>
 In the cosmogony of Japan, when, out of the chaotic mass, an egglike
 nucleus appears, having within itself the germ and potency of
 all the universal as well as of all terrestrial life, it is the
 "three-fold" just named, which differentiates. "The
 male aethereal" (<em>Yo</em>) principle
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] panions, companions,
 man as an emanation was both man and woman, Adam Kadmon verily,
 and this is the sense of the words 'Let there be Light, and it
 was Light.' And this is the two-fold man." (<em>Auszuge aus
 dem Zohar</em>,<em> </em>pp. 13-15.)
 </p><p>
 * See next footnote. These elements of Fire, Air, etc., are not
 our compound elements.
 </p><p>
 ** This "Consciousness" has no relation to our consciousness.
 The consciousness of the "One manifested," if not absolute,
 is still unconditioned. Mahat (the Universal Mind) is the first
 production of the Brahma-Creator, but also of the Pradhana (undifferentiated
 matter).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 217 TEACHINGS CONTRASTED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ascends and the female grosser or more material principle (<em>In</em>)
 is precipitated into the Universe of substance, when a separation
 occurs between the celestial and the terrestrial. From this the
 female, the mother, the first rudimentary objective being is born.
 It is ethereal, without form or sex, and yet it is from this and
 the mother that the Seven Divine Spirits are born, from whom will
 emanate <em>the seven creations</em>,<em> </em>just as in the
 Codex Nazaraeus from Karabtanos and the Mother <em>Spiritus </em>the
 seven <em>evilly disposed </em>(material) spirits are born. It
 would be too long to give here the Japanese names, but once translated
 they stand in this order: --
 </p><p>
 (1.) The "Invisible Celibate," which is the creative
 logos of the noncreating "father," or the creative potentiality
 of the latter made manifest.
 </p><p>
 (2.) "The Spirit (or the God) of the rayless depths"
 (of Chaos); which becomes differentiated matter, or the world-stuff;
 also the mineral realm.
 </p><p>
 (3.) "The Spirit of the Vegetable Kingdom," of the "Abundant
 Vegetation."
 </p><p>
 (4.) This one is of dual nature, being at the same time "The
 Spirit of the Earth" and "the Spirit of the Sands,"
 the former containing the potentiality of the male element, the
 latter that of the female element, the two forming a combined
 nature.
 </p><p>
 These two were ONE; yet unconscious of being two.
 </p><p>
 In this duality were contained (<i>a</i>) the male, dark and muscular
 Being, <em>Isu no gai no Kami; </em>and<em> </em>(<em>b</em>)<em>
 Eku gai no Kami</em>,<em> </em>the female, fair and weaker or
 more delicate Being. Then, the: --
 </p><p>
 (5th and 6th.) Spirits who were androgynous or dual-sexed, and,
 finally: --
 </p><p>
 (7.) The <em>Seventh </em>Spirit, the last emanated from the "mother,"
 appears as the first divine human form distinctly male and female.
 It was the seventh creation, as in the Puranas, wherein man is
 the seventh creation of Brahma.
 </p><p>
 These,<em> Tsanagi-Tsanami</em>,<em> </em>descended into the Universe
 by the celestial Bridge (the milky way), and "<em>Tsanagi</em>,<em>
 </em>perceiving far below a chaotic mass of cloud and water, thrust
 his jewelled spear into the depths, and dry land appeared."
 Then the two separated to explore <em>Onokoro</em>,<em> </em>the
 newly-created island-world; etc., etc. (<em>Omoie</em>)<em>.</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 218 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 Such are the Japanese exoteric fables, the rind that conceals
 the kernel of the same one truth of the Secret Doctrine. Turning
 back to the esoteric explanations in every cosmogony: --
 </p><p>
 (<em>d</em>) The<em> Third </em>order corresponds to the <em>Atma-Buddhi-Manas:
 </em>Spirit, Soul and Intellect, and is called the "Triads."
 </p><p>
 (<em>e</em>) The<em> Fourth </em>are substantial Entities. This
 is the highest group among the <em>Rupas </em>(Atomic Forms*).
 It is the nursery of the human, conscious, spiritual Souls. They
 are called the "Imperishable Jivas," and constitute,
 through the order below their own, the first group of the first
 septenary** host -- the great mystery of human conscious and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is worthy of notice that, while rejecting as a superstition
 of Occultism, and religion too, the theory of substantial and
 invisible Beings called Angels, Elementals, etc. -- without, of
 course, having ever looked into the philosophy of these incorporeal
 Entities, or thought over them -- modern chemistry, owing to observation
 and discovery, should have unconsciously been forced to adopt
 and recognize the same ratio of progression and order in the evolution
 of chemical atoms as Occultism does, both for its Dhyanis and
 Atoms -- analogy being its first law. As seen above, the very
 first group of the Rupa Angels is quaternary, an element being
 added to each in descending order. So are the atoms, adopting
 the phraseology of chemistry, monatomic, diatomic, and tetratomic,
 progressing downwards. Let it be remembered that Fire, Water,
 and Air, or the "Elements of primary Creation" so-called,
 are not the compound Elements they are on Earth, but noumenal
 homogeneous Elements -- the Spirits thereof. Then follow the septenary
 groups or hosts. Placed on parallel lines in a diagram with Atoms,
 the Natures of those Beings would be seen to correspond in their
 downward scale of progression to composite elements in a mathematically
 identical manner, as to analogy. This refers, of course, only
 to diagrams made by the Occultists; for were the scale of Angelic
 Beings to be placed on a parallel line with the scale of the chemical
 atoms of Science -- from the hypothetical Helium down to Uranium
 -- they would of course be found to differ. For these have, as
 correspondents on the Astral plane, only the four lowest orders
 -- the higher three principles in the atom, or rather molecule
 or chemical element, being perceptible only to the initiated Dangma's
 eye. But then, if Chemistry desired to find itself on the right
 path, it would have to correct its tabular arrangement by that
 of the Occultists -- which it may refuse to do. In Esoteric Philosophy,
 every physical particle corresponds to and depends on its higher
 <i>noumenon</i> -- the Being to whose essence it belongs; and
 above as below, the Spiritual evolves from the Divine, the psycho-mental
 from the Spiritual -- tainted from its lower plane by the astral
 -- the whole animate and (seemingly) inanimate Nature evolving
 on parallel lines, and drawing its attributes from above as well
 as from below.
 </p><p>
 ** The number seven does not imply only seven Entities, but seven
 groups or Hosts, as explained before. The highest group, the Asuras
 born in Brahma's first body -- [[Footnote continued on next page]]
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 219 THE HIERARCHIES OF SPIRITS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 intellectual Being. For the latter are the field wherein lies
 concealed <em>in its privation </em>the germ <em>that will fall
 into generation. </em>That germ will become the spiritual potency
 in the physical cell that guides the development of the embryo,
 and which is the cause of the hereditary transmission of faculties
 and all the inherent qualities in man. The Darwinian theory, however,
 of the transmission of acquired faculties, is neither taught nor
 accepted in Occultism. Evolution, in it, proceeds on quite other
 lines; the physical, according to esoteric teaching, evolving
 gradually from the spiritual, mental, and psychic. This inner
 soul of the physical cell -- this "spiritual plasm"
 that dominates the germinal plasm -- is the key that must open
 one day the gates of the terra incognita of the Biologist, now
 called the dark mystery of Embryology. (<em>See text and note
 infra.</em>)
 </p><p>
 (<em>f</em>) The Fifth group is a very mysterious one, as it is
 connected with the Microcosmic Pentagon, the five-pointed star
 representing man. In India and Egypt these Dhyanis were connected
 with the Crocodile, and their abode is in Capricornus. These are
 convertible terms in Indian astrology, as this (tenth) sign of
 the Zodiac is called <em>Makara</em>,<em> </em>loosely translated
 "crocodile." The word itself is occultly interpreted
 in various ways, as will be shown further on. In Egypt the defunct
 man -- whose symbol is the pentagram or the five-pointed star,
 the points of which represent the limbs of a man -- was shown
 emblematically transformed into a crocodile: Sebakh or Sevekh
 "or seventh," as Mr. Gerald Massey says, showing it
 as having been the type of intelligence, is a dragon in reality,
 not a crocodile. He is the "Dragon of Wisdom" or Manas,
 the "Human Soul," Mind, the Intelligent principle, called
 in our esoteric philosophy the "Fifth" principle.
 </p><p>
 Says the defunct "Osirified" in ch. lxxxviii., "Book
 of the Dead," or the <em>Ritual</em>,<em> </em>under the
 glyph of a mummiform god with a crocodile's head: --
 </p><p>
 (1) "I am the god (crocodile) presiding at the fear . . .
 at the arrival of his Soul among men. I am the god-crocodile brought
 for destruction" (an allusion to the destruction of divine
 spiritual purity
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] which turned into "Night"
 -- are septenary, <em>i.e.</em>, divided like the Pitris into
 seven classes, three of which are arupa (bodiless) and four with
 bodies. (See Vishnu Purana, Book I.) They are in fact more truly
 our <em>Pitris </em>(ancestors) than the Pitris who projected
 the first physical men. (See Book II.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 220 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 when man acquires the knowledge of good and evil; also to the
 "fallen" gods, or angels of every theogony).
 </p><p>
 (2) "I am the fish of the great Horus (as <em>Mankara </em>is
 the "crocodile," the vehicle of Varuna). I am merged
 in Sekten."
 </p><p>
 This last sentence gives the corroboration of, and repeats the
 doctrine of, esoteric Buddhism, for it alludes directly to the
 fifth principle (Manas), or the most spiritual part of its essence
 rather, which merges into, is absorbed by, and made one with Atma-Buddhi
 after the death of man. For Se-khen is the residence or <em>loka
 </em>of the god Khem (Horus-Osiris, or Father and Son), hence
 the "Devachan" of Atma-Buddhi. In the Ritual of the
 Dead the defunct is shown entering into Sekhem with Horus-Thot
 and "emerging from it as pure spirit" (lxiv., 29). Thus
 the defunct says (v. 130): "I see the forms of (myself, as
 various) men transforming eternally . . . I know this (chapter).
 He who knows it . . . takes all kinds of living forms." .
 . .
 </p><p>
 And in verse 35, addressing in magic formula that which is called,
 in Egyptian esotericism, the "ancestral heart," or the
 re-incarnating principle, the permanent <strong>E</strong>GO,
 the defunct says: --
 </p><p>
 "Oh my heart, my ancestral heart necessary for my transformations,
 . . . . . . do not separate thyself from me before the guardian
 of the Scales. Thou art my personality within my breast, divine
 companion <em>watching over my fleshes </em>(bodies). . . . .
 . ."
 </p><p>
 It is in Sekhem that lies concealed "the Mysterious Face,"
 or the real man concealed under the false personality, the triple-crocodile
 of Egypt, the symbol of the higher Trinity or human Triad, <em>Atma</em>,<em>
 Buddhi </em>and<em> Manas.* </em>In all the ancient papyri the
 crocodile is called <em>Sebek </em>(Seventh), while the water
 is the fifth principle esoterically; and, as already stated, Mr.
 Gerald Massey shows that the crocodile was "the Seventh Soul,
 the supreme one of seven -- the Seer unseen." Even exoterically
 <em>Sekhem </em>is the residence of the god Khem, and Khem is
 Horus avenging the death of his father Osiris, hence punishing
 the Sins of man when he becomes a disembodied Soul. Thus the defunct
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * One of the explanations of the real though hidden meaning of
 this Egyptian religious glyph is easy. The crocodile is the first
 to await and meet the devouring fires of the morning sun, and
 very soon came to personify the solar heat. When the sun arose,
 it was like the arrival on earth and among men "of the divine
 soul which informs the Gods." Hence the strange symbolism.
 The mummy donned the head of a crocodile to show that it was a
 soul arriving from the earth.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 221 CORRELATION OF BEINGS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "Osirified" became the god Khem, who "gleans the
 field of <em>Aanroo</em>,"<em> i.e.</em>, he gleans either
 his reward or punishment, as that field is the celestial locality
 (Devachan) where the defunct is given <em>wheat</em>,<em> </em>the
 food of divine justice. The fifth group of the celestial Beings
 is supposed to contain in itself the dual attributes of both the
 spiritual and physical aspects of the Universe; the two poles,
 so to say, of Mahat the Universal Intelligence, and the dual nature
 of man, the spiritual and the physical. Hence its number Five,
 multiplied and made into ten, connecting it with <em>Makara</em>,<em>
 </em>the 10th sign of Zodiac.
 </p><p>
 (<em>g</em>)<em> </em>The sixth and seventh groups partake of
 the lower qualities of the Quaternary. They are conscious, ethereal
 Entities, as invisible as Ether, which are shot out like the boughs
 of a tree from the first central group of the four, and shoot
 out in their turn numberless side groups, the lower of which are
 the Nature-Spirits, or Elementals of countless kinds and varieties;
 from the formless and unsubstantial -- the ideal THOUGHTS of their
 creators -- down to the Atomic, though, to human perception, invisible
 organisms. The latter are considered as the "Spirits of Atoms"
 for they are the first remove (backwards) from the physical Atom
 -- sentient, if not intelligent creatures. They are all subject
 to Karma, and have to work it out through every cycle. For, as
 the doctrine teaches, there are no such privileged beings in the
 universe, whether in our or in other systems, in the outer or
 the inner worlds,* as the angels of the Western Religion and the
 Judean. A Dhyan Chohan has to become one; he cannot be born or
 appear suddenly on the plane of life as a full-blown angel. The
 Celestial Hierarchy of the present Manvantara will find itself
 transferred in the next cycle of life into higher, superior worlds,
 and will make room for a new hierarchy, composed of the elect
 ones of our mankind. Being is an endless cycle within the one
 absolute eternity, wherein move numberless inner cycles finite
 and conditioned. Gods, created as such, would evince no personal
 merit in being gods. Such a class of beings, perfect only by virtue
 of the special immaculate nature inherent in them, in the face
 of suffering and struggling humanity, and even of the lower creation,
 would be the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * A world when called "a higher world" is not higher
 by reason of its location, but because it is superior in quality
 or essence. Yet such a world is generally understood by the profane
 as "Heaven," and located above our heads.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 222 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 symbol of an eternal injustice quite Satanic in character, an
 ever present crime. It is an anomaly and an impossibility in Nature.
 Therefore the "Four" and the "Three" have
 to incarnate as all other beings have. This sixth group, moreover,
 remains almost inseparable from man, who draws from it all but
 his highest and lowest principles, or his spirit and body, the
 five middle human principles being the very essence of those Dhyanis.*
 Alone, the Divine Ray (the Atman) proceeds directly from the One.
 When asked how that can be? How is it possible to conceive that
 those "gods," or angels, can be at the same time their
 own emanations and their personal selves? Is it in the same sense
 in the material world, where the son is (in one way) his father,
 being his blood, the bone of his bone and the flesh of his flesh?
 To this the teachers answer "Verily it is so." But one
 has to go deep into the mystery of BEING before one can fully
 comprehend this truth.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA VII. -- <em>Continued.</em> </h4>
 
 <p>
 2. <strong>T</strong>HE ONE RAY MULTIPLIES THE SMALLER RAYS. <strong>L</strong>IFE
 PRECEDES FORM, AND LIFE SURVIVES THE LAST ATOM (<em>of Form</em>,<em>
 Sthula-sarira</em>,<em> external body</em>)<em>. </em><strong>T</strong>HROUGH
 THE COUNTLESS RAYS THE LIFE-RAY, THE ONE, LIKE A THREAD THROUGH
 MANY BEADS (<em>pearls</em>)<em> </em>(<em>a</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>This sloka expresses the conception -- a
 purely Vedantic one, as already explained elsewhere -- of a life-thread,
 <em>Sutratma</em>,<em> </em>running through successive generations.
 How, then, can this be explained? By resorting to a simile, to
 a familiar illustration, though necessarily imperfect, as all
 our available analogies must be. Before resorting to it, however,
 I would ask whether it seems <em>unnatural</em>,<em> </em>least
 of all "supernatural," to any one of us, when we consider
 that process known as the growth and development of a foetus into
 a healthy baby weighing several pounds evolves from what? From
 the segmentation of an infinitesimally small ovum and a spermatozoon;
 and afterwards we see that baby develop into a six-foot man! This
 refers to the atomic and physical
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Paracelsus calls them the <em>Flagae; </em>the Christians, the
 "Guardian Angels;" the Occultist, the "Ancestors,
 the Pitris;" they are the <em>sixfold </em>Dhyan Chohans,
 having the six spiritual Elements in the composition of their
 bodies -- in fact, men, minus the physical body.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 223 THE MYSTERY OF BEING.</h6>
 
 <p>
 expansion from the microscopically small into something very large,
 from the -- to the naked eye -- unseen, into the visible and objective.
 Science has provided for all this; and, I dare say, her theories,
 embryological, biological, and physiological, are correct enough
 so far as exact observation of the material goes. Nevertheless,
 the two chief difficulties of the science of embryology -- namely,
 what are the forces at work in the formation of the foetus, and
 the <em>cause </em>of "hereditary transmission" of likeness,
 physical, moral or mental -- have never been properly answered;
 nor will they ever be solved till the day when scientists condescend
 to accept the Occult theories.* But if this physical pheno-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The materialists and the evolutionists of the Darwinian school
 would be ill-advised to accept the newly worked-out theories of
 Professor Weissmann, the author of <em>Beitrage zur Descendenzlehre</em>,<em>
 </em>with regard to one of the two mysteries of Embryology, as
 above specified, which he seems to have solved -- as he thinks.
 For, when it is solved, Science will have stepped over into the
 domain of the truly occult, and stepped for ever out of the realm
 of transformation, as taught by Darwin. The two are irreconcileable,
 from the standpoint of materialism. Regarded from that of the
 Occultists, it solves all these mysteries. Those who are not acquainted
 with the new discovery of Professor Weissman -- at one time a
 fervent Darwinist -- ought to hasten to repair the deficiency.
 The German Embryologist-philosopher shows -- thus stepping over
 the heads of the Greek Hippocrates and Aristotle, right back into
 the teachings of the old Aryans -- one infinitesimal cell, out
 of millions of others at work in the formation of an organism,
 determining alone and unaided, by means of constant segmentation
 and multiplication, the correct image of the future man (or animal)
 in its physical, mental, and psychic characteristics. It is that
 cell which impresses on the face and form of the new individual
 the features of the parents or of some distant ancestor; it is
 that cell again which transmits to him the intellectual and mental
 idiosyncracies of his sires, and so on. This Plasm is the immortal
 portion of our bodies -- simply through the process of successive
 assimilations. Darwin's theory, viewing the embryological cell
 as an essence or the extract from all other cells, is set aside;
 it is incapable of accounting for hereditary transmission. There
 are but two ways of explaining the mystery of heredity; either
 the substance of the germinal cell is endowed with the faculty
 of crossing the whole cycle of transformations that lead to the
 construction of a separate organism and then to the reproduction
 of identical germinal cells; or, <em>those germinal cells do not
 have their genesis at all in the body of the individual</em>,<em>
 but proceed directly from the ancestral germinal cell passed from
 father to son through long generations. </em>It is the latter
 hypothesis that Weissmann accepted and has worked upon; and it
 is to this cell that he traces the immortal portion of man. So
 far, so good; and when this almost correct theory is accepted,
 how will Biologists explain the first appearance of this everlasting
 cell? Unless man "grew" like the "immortal Topsy,"
 and was not born at all, but fell from the clouds, how was that
 embryological cell born in him?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 224 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 menon astonishes no one, except in so far as it puzzles the Embryologists,
 why should our intellectual and inner growth, the evolution of
 the human-spiritual to the Divine-Spiritual, be regarded as, or
 seem, more impossible than the other? Now to the simile.
 </p><p>
 Complete the physical plasm, mentioned in the last foot-note,
 the "Germinal Cell" of man with all its material potentialities,
 with the "spiritual plasm," so to say, or the fluid
 that contains the five lower principles of the six-principled
 Dhyan -- and you have the secret, if you are spiritual enough
 to understand it.
 </p><p>
 "When the seed of the animal man is cast into the soil of
 the animal woman, that seed cannot germinate unless it has been
 fructified by the five virtues (the fluid of, or the emanation
 from the principles) of the six-fold Heavenly man. Wherefore the
 Microcosm is represented as a Pentagon, within the Hexagon Star,
 the "Macrocosm." ("[[<em>Anthropos</em>]],")
 a work on Occult Embryology, Book I.). Then: "The functions
 of <em>Jiva </em>on this Earth are of a five-fold character. In
 the mineral atom it is connected with the lowest principles of
 the Spirits of the Earth (the six-fold Dhyanis); in the vegetable
 particle, with their second -- the <em>Prana </em>(life); in the
 animal, with all these plus the third and the fourth; in man,
 the germ must receive the fruition of all the five. Otherwise
 he will be born no higher than an animal"; namely, a congenital
 idiot. Thus in man alone the Jiva is complete. As to his seventh
 principle, it is but one of the Beams of the Universal Sun. Each
 rational creature receives only the temporary loan of that which
 has to return to its source; while his physical body is shaped
 by the lowest terrestrial lives, through physical, chemical, and
 physiological evolution. "The Blessed Ones have nought to
 do with the purgations of matter." (Kabala, Chaldean Book
 of Numbers).
 </p><p>
 It comes to this: Mankind in its first prototypal, shadowy form,
 is the offspring of the Elohim of Life (or Pitris); in its qualitative
 and physical aspect it is the direct progeny of the "Ancestors,"
 the lowest Dhyanis, or Spirits of the Earth; for its moral, psychic,
 and spiritual nature, it is indebted to a group of divine Beings,
 the name and characteristics of which will be given in Book II.
 Collectively, men are the handiwork of hosts of various spirits;
 distributively, the tabernacles of those hosts; and occasionally
 and singly, the vehicles of some of them. In our present all-material
 Fifth Race, the earthly Spirit of the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 225 SPIRIT FALLING INTO MATTER.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Fourth is still strong in us; but we are approaching the time
 when the pendulum of evolution will direct its swing decidedly
 upwards, bringing Humanity back on a parallel line with the primitive
 third Root-Race in Spirituality. During its childhood, mankind
 was composed wholly of that Angelic Host, who were the indwelling
 Spirits that animated the monstrous and gigantic tabernacles of
 clay of the Fourth Race built by (as they are now also) and composed
 of countless myriads of lives.* This sentence will be explained
 later on in the present Commentary. The "tabernacles"
 have improved in texture and symmetry of form, growing and developing
 with the globe that bore them; but the physical improvement took
 place at the expense of the spiritual inner man and nature. The
 three middle principles in earth and man became with every race
 more material; the Soul stepping back to make room for the physical
 intellect; the essence of elements becoming the material and composite
 elements now known.
 </p><p>
 Man is not, nor could he ever be, the complete product of the
 "Lord God"; but he <em>is </em>the child of the <em>Elohim</em>,<em>
 </em>so arbitrarily changed into the singular masculine gender.
 The first Dhyanis, commissioned to "create" man in their
 image, could only throw off their shadows, like a delicate model
 for the Nature Spirits of matter to work upon. (See Book II.)
 Man is, beyond any doubt, formed physically out of the dust of
 the Earth, but his creators and fashioners were many. Nor can
 it be said that the "Lord God breathed into his nostrils
 the breath of life," unless that God is identified with the
 "<strong>O</strong>NE <strong>L</strong>IFE," Omnipresent
 though invisible, and unless the same operation is attributed
 to "God" on behalf of every <em>living Soul</em> --<em>
 </em>or<em> Nephesch</em>,<em> </em>which is the <em>vital </em>Soul,
 not the divine Spirit or <em>Ruach</em>,<em> </em>which ensures
 to man alone a divine degree of immortality, that no animal, as
 such, could ever attain in this cycle of incarnation. It is the
 inadequate distinctions made by the Jews, and now by our Western
 metaphysicians, who, not knowing of, and being unable to understand,
 hence to accept, more than a triune man -- Spirit, Soul,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Science, dimly perceiving the truth, may find Bacteria and other
 infinitesimals in the human body, and see in them but occasional
 and abnormal visitors to which diseases are attributed. Occultism
 -- which discerns a life in every atom and molecule, whether in
 a mineral or human body, in air, fire or water -- affirms that
 our whole body is built of such lives, the smallest bacteria under
 the microscope being to them in comparative size like an elephant
 to the tiniest infusoria.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 226 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Body -- thus confuse the "breath of life" with immortal
 Spirit.* This applies also directly to the Protestant theologians,
 who, in translating verse 8 of Ch. III. in the Fourth Gospel,
 have entirely perverted the meaning. Indeed the verse is made
 to say "The <em>wind </em>bloweth where it listeth,"
 instead of "the <em>Spirit </em>goeth where it willeth,"
 as in the original and also in the translation of the Greek Eastern
 Church.
 </p><p>
 Thus the philosophy of psychic, spiritual, and mental relations
 with man's physical functions is in almost inextricable confusion.
 Neither the old Aryan, nor the Egyptian psychology are now properly
 understood. Nor can they be assimilated without accepting the
 esoteric septenary, or, at any rate, the Vedantic quinquepartite
 division of the human inner principles. Failing which, it will
 be for ever impossible to understand the metaphysical and purely
 psychic and even physiological relations between the Dhyan-Chohans,
 or Angels, on the one plane, and humanity on the other. No Eastern
 (Aryan) esoteric works are so far published, but we possess the
 Egyptian papyri which speak clearly
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The learned and very philosophical author of "New Aspects
 of Life" would impress upon his reader that the <em>Nephesh
 chaiah </em>(living soul), according to the Hebrews, "proceeded
 from, or was produced by, the infusion of the Spirit or Breath
 of Life into the quickening body of man, and was to supersede
 and take the place of that spirit in the thus constituted self,
 so that the spirit passed into, was lost sight of, and disappeared
 in the living Soul." The human body, he thinks, ought to
 be viewed as a matrix in which, and from which, the Soul (which
 he seems to place higher than the spirit) is developed -- considered
 <em>functionally </em>and from the standpoint of activity, the
 Soul stands undeniably higher in this finite and conditioned world
 of Maya -- the Soul, he says, "is ultimately produced from
 the animated body of man." Thus the author identifies "Spirit"
 (Atma) simply with "the breath of life." The Eastern
 Occultists will demur to this statement, for it is based on the
 erroneous conception that <em>Prana</em> and<em> Atma </em>or<em>
 Jivatma </em>are one and the same thing. The author supports the
 argument by showing that with the ancient Hebrews, Greeks and
 even Latins, <em>Ruach</em>,<em> Pneuma </em>and<em> Spiritus</em>
 -- with the Jews undeniably, and with the Greeks and Romans very
 probably -- meant Wind; the Greek word <em>Anemos </em>(wind)
 and the Latin <em>Anima </em>"Soul" having a suspicious
 relation.
 </p><p>
 This is very far fetched. A legitimate battle-field for deciding
 this question is hardly to be found, since Mr. Pratt seems to
 be a practical, matter-of-fact metaphysician, a kind of Kabalist-Positivist,
 and the Eastern metaphysicians, especially the Vedantins, are
 all Idealists. The Occultists are also of the extreme esoteric
 Vedantin school, and they call the One Life (Parabrahm), the Great
 Breath and the Whirlwind; but they disconnect the seventh principle
 entirely from matter or any relation to, or connection with it.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 227 THE EGYPTIAN SYSTEM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of the seven principles or the "Seven Souls of Man."*
 The Book of the Dead gives a complete list of the "transformations"
 that every defunct undergoes, while divesting himself, one by
 one, of all those principles -- materialised for the sake of clearness
 into ethereal entities or bodies. We must, moreover, remind those
 who try to prove that the ancient Egyptians knew nothing of and
 did not teach Reincarnation, that the "Soul" (the <em>Ego
 </em>or<em> Self</em>)<em> </em>of the defunct is said to be living
 in Eternity: it is immortal, "co-eval with, and disappearing
 with the Solar boat," <em>i.e.</em>, for the cycle of necessity.
 This "Soul" <em>emerges from the Tiaou </em>(the realm
 <em>of the cause of life</em>)<em> </em>and joins the living on
 Earth <em>by</em> <em>day</em>,<em> </em>to return to <em>Tiaou
 </em>every night. This expresses the periodical existences of
 the Ego. (Book of the Dead, cvxliii.)
 </p><p>
 The<em> shadow</em>,<em> </em>the astral form, is annihilated,
 "devoured by the Uraeus" (cxlix., 51), the<em> Manes
 </em>will be annihilated; the two twins (the 4th and 5th principles)
 will be scattered; but the Soul-bird, "the divine Swallow
 -- and the Uraeus of Flame" (Manas and Atma-Buddhi) will
 live in the eternity, for they are their mother's husbands.**
 </p><p>
 Like alone produces like. The Earth gives Man his body, the gods
 (Dhyanis) his five inner principles, the psychic Shadow, of which
 those gods are often the animating principle. <strong>S</strong>PIRIT
 (Atman) is one -- and indiscrete. It is not in the <em>Tiaou.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 For what is the <em>Tiaou? </em>The frequent allusion to it in
 the "Book of the Dead" contains a mystery. <em>Tiaou
 </em>is the path of the Night Sun, the inferior hemisphere, or
 the infernal region of the Egyptians, placed by them on the <em>concealed
 side of the moon. </em>The human being, in their
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>* Vide </em>in Part II., Book II., "The Seven Souls of
 Man," the divisions made respectively by Messrs. Gerald Massey
 and Franz Lambert.
 </p><p>
 ** Another suggestive analogy between the Aryan or Brahmanical
 and the Egyptian esotericism. The former call the Pitris "the
 lunar ancestors" of men; and the Egyptians made of the Moon-God,
 Taht-Esmun, the first human ancestor. This "moon-god"
 "expressed the Seven nature-powers that were prior to himself,
 and were summed up in him as his seven souls, of which he was
 the manifestor as the eighth one (hence the eighth sphere). The
 seven rays of the Chaldean Heptakis or Iao, on the Gnostic stones
 indicate the same septenary of souls." . . . "The first
 form of the mystical SEVEN was seen to be figured in heaven, by
 the seven large stars of the Great Bear, the constellation assigned
 by the Egyptians to the Mother of Time, and of the seven elemental
 powers." (See<em> The Seven Souls</em>,<em> </em>etc.) As
 well known to every Hindu, this same constellation represents
 in India the Seven Rishis, and as such is called <em>Riksha</em>,<em>
 </em>and<em> Chitra-Sikhandinas.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 228 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 esotericism, came out from the moon (a triple mystery -- astronomical,
 physiological, and psychical at once); he crossed the whole cycle
 of existence and then returned to his birth-place before issuing
 from it again. Thus the defunct is shown arriving in the West,
 receiving his judgment before Osiris, resurrecting as the god
 Horus, and circling round the sidereal heavens, which is an allegorical
 assimilation to Ra, the Sun; then having crossed the <em>Noot
 </em>(the celestial abyss), returning once more to Tiaou: an assimilation
 to Osiris, who, as the God of life and reproduction, inhabits
 the moon. Plutarch (Isis and Osiris, ch. xliii.) shows the Egyptians
 celebrating a festival called "The Ingress of Osiris into
 the moon." In chapter xli. life is promised after death;
 and the renovation of life is placed under the patronage of Osiris-Lunus,
 because the moon was the symbol of life-renewals or reincarnations,
 owing to its growth, waning, dying, and reappearance every month.
 In the <em>Dankmoe</em>,<em> </em>(iv.<em> </em>5) it is said:
 -- "Oh, Osiris-Lunus! That renews to thee thy renewal."
 And Safekh says to Seti I. (Mariette's Abydos, plate 51), "Thou
 renewest thyself as the god Lunus when a babe." It is still
 better explained in a Louvre papyrus (P. Pierret, "Etudes
 Egyptologiques"): "Couplings and conceptions abound
 when he (Osiris-Lunus) is seen in heaven on that day." Says
 Osiris: "Oh, sole radiant beam of the moon! I issue from
 the circulating multitudes (of stars) . . . . . . Open me the
 Tiaou, for Osiris N. I will issue by day to do what I have to
 do amongst the living" ("Book of the Dead," ch.
 ii.), -- <em>i.e.</em>,<em> </em>to produce conceptions.
 </p><p>
 Osiris was "God manifest in generation," because the
 ancients knew, far better than the moderns, the real occult influences
 of the lunar body upon the mysteries of conception.* Later on,
 when the moon became connected with female goddesses** -- with
 Diana, Isis, Artemis,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In the oldest systems we find the Moon always male. Thus Soma
 is, with the Hindus, a kind of sidereal Don Juan, a "King,"
 and the father, albeit illegitimate, of Buddha -- Wisdom, which
 relates to Occult Knowledge, a wisdom gathered through a thorough
 acquaintance with lunar mysteries including those of sexual generation.
 (See "Holy of Holies.")
 </p><p>
 ** If instead of being taught in Sunday Schools useless lessons
 from the Bible, the armies of the ragged and the poor were taught
 Astrology -- so far, at any rate, as the occult properties of
 the Moon and its hidden influences on generation are concerned,
 then there would be little need to fear increase of the population
 nor to resort to the questionable literature of the Malthusians
 for its arrest. For it is the Moon and her [[Footnote continued
 on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 229 MANY STREAMS, BUT ONE SOURCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Juno, etc., that connection was due to a thorough knowledge of
 physiology and female nature, physical as much as psychic. But,
 primarily, the Sun and Moon were the only visible and, so to say,
 <em>tangible </em>[by their effects] psychic and physiological
 deities -- the Father and the Son, while Space and air in general,
 or that expanse of Heaven called Noot by the Egyptians, was the
 concealed Spirit or Breath of the two. These "Father and
 Son" were interchangeable in their functions and worked harmoniously
 together in their effects upon terrestrial nature and humanity;
 hence they were regarded as ONE, though TWO in personified Entities.
 They were both males, and both had their distinct and also collaborative
 work in the causative generation of Humanity. So much from the
 astronomical and cosmic standpoints viewed and expressed in symbolical
 language -- which became in our last races theological and dogmatic.
 But behind this veil of Cosmic and Astrological symbols, there
 were the Occult mysteries of Anthropography and the primeval genesis
 of man. And in this, no knowledge of symbols -- or even the key
 to the <em>post-diluvian </em>symbolical language of the Jews
 -- will, or can help, save only with reference to that which was
 laid down in national scriptures for exoteric uses; the sum of
 which, however cleverly veiled, was only the smallest portion
 of the real primitive history of each people, often relating,
 moreover, -- as in the Hebrew Scriptures -- merely to the terrestrial
 human, not divine life of that nation. That psychic and spiritual
 element belonged to MYSTERY and INITIATION. There were things
 never recorded in scrolls, but, as in Central Asia, on rocks and
 in subterranean crypts.
 </p><p>
 Nevertheless, there was a time when the whole world was "of
 one lip and of one knowledge," and Man knew more of his origin
 than he does now, and thus knew that the Sun and Moon, however
 large a part they do play in the constitution, growth and development
 of the human body, were not the direct causative agents of his
 appearance on Earth;
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] conjunctions that regulate
 conceptions, and every astrologer in India knows it. During the
 previous and the present races, at least at the beginning of this
 one, those who indulged in marital relations during certain lunar
 phases that made those relations sterile were regarded as sorcerers
 and sinners. But even now those sins of old, based on the Occult
 knowledge and the abuse of it, would appear preferable to the
 crimes of to-day, which are perpetrated because of the complete
 ignorance of, and disbelief in all such occult influences.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 230 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 these agents being, in truth, the living and intelligent Powers
 which the Occultists call Dhyan Chohans.
 </p><p>
 As to this, a very learned admirer of the Jewish Esotericism tells
 us that "the Kabala says expressly that Elohim is a '<em>general
 abstraction</em>'<em>; </em>what we call in mathematics 'a constant
 co-efficient' or a 'general function' entering into all construction,
 not particular; that is, by the general ratio 1 to 31415, (the
 astro-Dhyanic and) Elohistic figures." To this the Eastern
 Occultist replies: Quite so, it is an abstraction to our physical
 senses. To our spiritual perceptions, however, and to our inner
 spiritual eye, the Elohim or Dhyanis are no more an abstraction
 than our soul and spirit are to us. Reject the one and you reject
 the other -- since that which is the <em>surviving Entity in us
 </em>is partly the direct emanation from, and partly <em>those
 celestial Entities themselves. </em>One thing is sure; the Jews
 were perfectly acquainted with sorcery and various maleficent
 forces; but, with the exception of some of their great prophets
 and seers like Daniel and Ezekiel (Enoch belonging to a far distant
 race and not to any nation but to all, as a generic character),
 they knew little of, nor would they deal with, the real divine
 Occultism, their national character being averse to anything which
 had no direct bearing upon their own ethnical, tribal, and individual
 benefits -- witness their own prophets, and the curses thundered
 by them against the "stiff-necked race." But even the
 Kabala plainly shows the direct relation between the Sephiroth,
 or Elohim, and men.
 </p><p>
 Therefore, when it is proved to us that the Kabalistic identification
 of Jehovah with Binah, a female Sephiroth, has still another,
 a sub-occult meaning in it, then and then only the Occultist will
 be ready to pass the palm of perfection to the Kabalist. Until
 then, it is asserted that, as Jehovah is in the abstract sense
 of a "one living God," a single number, a metaphysical
 figment, and a reality only when put in his proper place as an
 emanation and a Sephiroth -- we have a right to maintain that
 the Zohar (as witnessed by the <strong>B</strong>OOK OF <strong>N</strong>UMBERS,
 at any rate), gave out originally, before the Christian Kabalists
 had disfigured it, and still gives out the same doctrine that
 we do; <em>i.e.</em>,<em> </em>it makes Man emanate, not from
 one Celestial <strong>M</strong>AN, but from a Septenary group
 of Celestial men or Angels, just as in "Pymander, the Thought
 Divine."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 231 THE DIFFERENTIATION OF THE "ONE."
 </h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA VII. -- <em>Continued.</em> </h4>
 
 <p>
 (3) <strong>W</strong>HEN THE ONE BECOMES TWO -- THE "THREE-FOLD"
 APPEARS (<em>a</em>). <strong>T</strong>HE THREE ARE (<em>linked
 into</em>)<em> </em>ONE;<em> </em>AND IT IS OUR THREAD, <strong>O</strong>
 <strong>L</strong>ANOO, THE HEART OF THE MAN-PLANT, CALLED <strong>S</strong>APTAPARNA
 (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) "When the ONE becomes two, the three-fold appears":
 to wit, when the One Eternal drops its reflection into the region
 of Manifestation, that reflection, "the Ray," differentiates
 the "Water of Space"; or, in the words of the "Book
 of the Dead"; "Chaos ceases, through the effulgence
 of the Ray of Primordial light dissipating total darkness by the
 help of the great magic power of the WORD of the (Central) Sun."
 Chaos becomes male-female, and Water, incubated through Light,
 and the "three-fold being issues as its First-born."
 "Osiris-Ptah (or RA) creates his own limbs (like Brahma)
 by creating the gods destined to personify his phases" during
 the Cycle (xvii., 4). The Egyptian Ra, issuing from the DEEP,
 is the Divine Universal Soul in its manifested aspect, and so
 is Narayana, the Purusha, "<em>concealed in Akasa and present
 in Ether.</em>"
 </p><p>
 This is the metaphysical explanation, and refers to the very beginning
 of Evolution, or, as we should rather say, of Theogony. The meaning
 of the Stanza when explained from another standpoint in its reference
 to the mystery of man and his origin, is still more difficult
 to comprehend. In order to form a clear conception of what is
 meant by the One becoming two, and then being transformed into
 the "three-fold," the student has to make himself thoroughly
 acquainted with what we call "Rounds." If he refers
 to "Esoteric Buddhism" -- the first attempt to sketch
 out an approximate outline of archaic Cosmogony -- he will find
 that by a "Round" is meant the serial evolution of nascent
 material nature, of the seven globes of our chain* with their
 mineral,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Several inimical critics are anxious to prove that no seven
 principles of man nor septenary constitution of our chain were
 taught in our earlier volume, "Isis Unveiled." Though
 in that work the doctrine could only be hinted at, there are many
 passages, nevertheless, in which the septenary constitution of
 both man and chain is openly mentioned. Speaking of the Elohim
 in Vol. II., page 420, it is said: "They remain over the
 seventh heaven (or spiritual world), for it is they who, according
 to the Kabalists, formed in succession the six material worlds,
 or rather, attempts at worlds that preceded our own, which, they
 say, is the seventh." Our globe is, of course, upon the diagram
 representing the "chain," the seventh and the lowest;
 though, [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 232 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 vegetable, and animal kingdoms (man being there included in the
 latter and standing at the head of it) during the whole period
 of a life-cycle. The latter would be called by the Brahmins "a
 Day of Brahma." It is, in short, one revolution of the "Wheel"
 (our planetary chain), which is composed of seven globes (or seven
 separate "Wheels," in another sense this time). When
 evolution has run downward into matter, from planet A to planet
 G, or Z, as the Western students call it, it is one Round. In
 the middle of the Fourth revolution, which is our present "Round":
 "Evolution has reached its acme of physical development,
 crowned its work with the perfect physical man, and, from this
 point, begins its work spirit-ward." All this needs little
 repetition, as it is well explained in "Esoteric Buddhism."
 That which was hardly touched upon, and of which the little that
 was said has misled many, is the origin of man, and it is upon
 this that a little more light may now be thrown, just enough to
 make the Stanza more comprehensible, as the process will be fully
 explained only in its legitimate place, in Book II.
 </p><p>
 Now every "Round" (on the descending scale) is but a
 repetition in a more concrete form of the Round which preceded
 it, as every globe -- down to our fourth sphere (the actual earth)
 -- is a grosser and more material copy of the more shadowy sphere
 which precedes it in their successive order, on the three higher
 planes. (See diagram in Stanza VI. Comm. 6). On its way upwards
 on the ascending arc, Evolution spiritualises and etherealises,
 so to speak, the general nature of all, bringing it on to a level
 with the plane on which the twin globe on the opposite side is
 placed; the result being, that when the seventh globe is reached
 (in whatever Round) the nature of everything that is evolving
 returns to the condition it was in at its starting point -- plus,
 every time, a new and superior degree in the states of consciousness.
 Thus it becomes clear that the "origin of man," so-called,
 on this our present
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] as the evolution on
 these globes is cyclic, it is the fourth in descending the arc
 of matter. And again, on page 367, Vol. II., it is written: "In
 the Egyptian notions, <em>as in those of all other faiths founded
 on philosophy</em>,<em> </em>man was not merely . . . an union
 of soul and body; he was a trinity when spirit was added to it;
 and besides that doctrine made him consist of body, astral form,
 or shadow, the animal soul, the higher soul, and terrestrial intelligence
 and a sixth principle, etc., etc. -- the seventh -- <strong>S</strong>PIRIT."
 So clearly are these principles mentioned, that even in the <em>Index</em>,<em>
 </em>one finds on page 683: -- \"Six principles of man"
 -- the seventh being the synthesis of the six, and <em>not a principle
 </em>but a ray of the Absolute <strong>A</strong>LL -- in strict
 truth.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 233 WHAT INCARNATES IN ANIMAL MAN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Round, or life-cycle on this planet, must occupy the same place
 in the same order -- save details based on local conditions and
 time -- as in the preceding Round. Again, it must be explained
 and remembered that, as the work of each Round is said to be apportioned
 to a different group of so-called "Creators" or "Architects,"
 so is that of every globe; <em>i.e.</em>, it is under the supervision
 and guidance of special "Builders" and "Watchers"
 -- the various Dhyan-Chohans.
 </p><p>
 The group of the hierarchy which is commissioned to "create"*
 men is a special group, then; yet it evolved shadowy man in this
 cycle just as a higher and still more spiritual group evolved
 him in the Third Round. But as it is the Sixth -- on the downward
 scale of Spirituality -- the last and seventh being the terrestrial
 Spirits (elementals) which gradually form, build, and condense
 his physical body -- this Sixth group evolves no more than the
 future man's shadowy form, a filmy, hardly visible transparent
 copy of themselves. It becomes the task of the fifth Hierarchy
 -- the mysterious beings that preside over the constellation Capricornus,
 Makara, or "Crocodile" in India as in Egypt -- to inform
 the empty and ethereal animal form and make of it the Rational
 Man. This is one of those subjects upon which very little may
 be said to the general public. It is a MYSTERY, truly, but only
 to him who is prepared to reject the existence of intellectual
 and conscious spiritual Beings in the Universe, limiting full
 Consciousness to man alone, and that only as a "function
 of the Brain." Many are those among the Spiritual Entities,
 who have incarnated bodily in man, since the beginning of his
 appearance, and who, for all that, still exist as independently
 as they did before, in the infinitudes of Space. . . .
 </p><p>
 To put it more clearly: the invisible Entity may be bodily present
 on earth without abandoning, however, its status and functions
 in the supersensuous regions. If this needs explanation, we can
 do no better than remind the reader of like cases in Spiritualism,
 though such cases are very rare, at least as regards the nature
 of the Entity incarnating,**
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Creation is an incorrect word to use, as no religion, not even
 the sect of the Visishta Adwaitees in India -- one which anthropomorphises
 even Parabrahmam -- believes in creation out of <em>nihil </em>as
 Christians and Jews do, but in evolution out of preexisting materials.
 </p><p>
 ** The so-called "Spirits" that may occasionally possess
 themselves of the bodies of mediums are not the Monads or Higher
 Principles of disembodied personalities. Such a "Spirit"
 can only be either an Elementary, or -- a Nirmanakaya.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 234 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 or taking temporary possession of a medium. Just as certain persons
 -- men and women, reverting to parallel cases among living persons
 -- whether by virtue of a peculiar organization, or through the
 power of acquired mystic knowledge, can be seen in their "double"
 in one place, while the body is many miles away; so the same thing
 can occur in the case of superior Beings.
 </p><p>
 Man, philosophically considered, is, in his outward form, simply
 an animal, hardly more perfect than his pithecoid-like ancestor
 of the third round. He is a living body, not a living being, since
 the realisation of existence, the "Ego-Sum," necessitates
 self-consciousness, and an animal can only have direct consciousness,
 or instinct. This was so well understood by the Ancients that
 the Kabalist even made of soul and body two lives, independent
 of each other.* The soul, whose body vehicle is the Astral, ethero-substantial
 envelope, could die and man be still living on earth -- <em>i.e.</em>,<em>
 </em>the soul could free itself from and quit the tabernacle for
 various reasons -- such as insanity, spiritual and physical depravity,
 etc.** Therefore, that which living men (Initiates)
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * On p. 340-351 (Genesis of the Soul) in the "<em>New Aspects
 of Life</em>,"<em> </em>the Author states the Kabalistic
 teaching: "They held that, functionally, Spirit and Matter
 of corresponding opacity and density tended to coalesce; and that
 the resultant created Spirits, in the disembodied state, were
 constituted on a scale in which the differing opacities and transparencies
 of Elemental or uncreated Spirit were reproduced. And that these
 Spirits in the disembodied state attracted, appropriated, digested
 and assimilated Elemental Spirit and Elemental Matter whose condition
 was conformed to their own." "They therefore taught
 that there was a wide difference in the condition of created Spirits;
 and that in the intimate association between the Spirit-world
 and the world of Matter, the more opaque Spirits in the disembodied
 state were drawn towards the more dense parts of the material
 world, and therefore tended towards the centre of the Earth, where
 they found the conditions most suited to their state; while the
 more transparent Spirits passed into the surrounding aura of the
 planet, the most rarified finding their home in its satellite."
 </p><p>
 This relates exclusively to our Elementary Spirits, and has naught
 to do with either the Planetary, Sidereal, Cosmic or Inter-Etheric
 Intelligent Forces or "Angels" as they are termed by
 the Roman Church. The Jewish Kabalists, especially the practical
 Occultists who dealt with ceremonial magic, busied themselves
 solely with the spirits of the Planets and the "Elementals"
 so-called. Therefore this covers only a portion of the Esoteric
 Teaching.
 </p><p>
 ** The possibility of the "Soul" (<em>i.e.</em>, the
 eternal Spiritual Ego) dwelling in the unseen worlds, while its
 body goes on living on Earth, is a pre-eminently occult doctrine,
 especially in Chinese and Buddhist philosophy. See "Isis
 Unveiled," vol. i., [[Footnote continued on next page]] 
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 235 DII SUNT DEMONES INVERSI.</h6>
 
 <p>
 can do, the Dhyanis, who have no physical body to hamper them,
 can do still better. This was the belief of the Antediluvians,
 and it is fast becoming that of modern intellectual society, in
 Spiritualism, besides the Greek and Roman Churches, which teach
 the ubiquity of their angels. The Zoroastrians regarded their
 Amshaspends as dual entities (Ferouers), applying this duality
 -- in esoteric philosophy, at any rate -- to all the spiritual
 and invisible denizens of the numberless worlds in space which
 are visible to our eye. In a note of Damascius (sixth century)
 on the Chaldean oracles, we have a triple evidence of the universality
 of this doctrine, for he says: "In these oracles the seven
 Cosmocratores of the world, ('The World-Pillars,') mentioned likewise
 by St. Paul, are double -- one set being commissioned to rule
 the superior worlds the spiritual and the sidereal, and the other
 to guide and watch over the worlds of matter." Such is also
 the opinion of Jamblichus, who makes an evident distinction between
 the archangels and the "Archontes." (See "De Mysteriis,"
 sec. ii., ch. 3.) The above may be applied, of course, to the
 distinction made between the degrees or orders of spiritual beings,
 and it is in this sense that the Roman Catholic Church tries to
 interpret and teach the difference; for while the archangels are
 in her teaching divine and holy, their doubles are denounced by
 her as devils.* But the word "ferouer" is not to be
 understood in this sense, for it means simply the reverse or the
 opposite side of some attribute or quality. Thus when the Occultist
 says that the "Demon is the lining of God" (evil, the
 reverse of the medal), he does not mean two separate
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] p. 602, for an illustration.
 Many are the <em>Soulless </em>men among us, for the occurrence
 is found to take place in wicked materialists as well as in persons
 "who advance in holiness and never turn back." (See
 ibid and also "Isis," vol. ii., p. 369.)
 </p><p>
 * This identity between the Spirit and its material "double"
 (in man it is the reverse) explains still better the confusion,
 alluded to already in this work, made in the names and individualities,
 as well as the numbers, of the Rishis and the Prajapatis; especially
 between those of the Satyayuga and the Mahabharatan period. It
 also throws additional light on what the Secret Doctrine teaches
 with regard to the Root and the Seed Manus (see Book ii. "On
 the primitive Manus of humanity"). Not only those progenitors
 of our mankind, but every human being, we are taught, has its
 prototype in the Spiritual Spheres; which prototype is the highest
 essence of his seventh principle. Thus the seven Manus become
 14, the Root Manu being the Prime Cause, and the "Seed-Manu"
 its effect; and when the latter reach from Satyayuga (the first
 stage) to the heroic period, these Manus or Rishis become 21 in
 number.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 236 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 actualities, but the two aspects or facets of the same Unity.
 Now the best man living would appear, side by side with an Archangel
 -- as described in Theology -- a fiend. Hence a certain reason
 to depreciate a lower "double," immersed far deeper
 in matter than its original. But there is still as little cause
 to regard them as devils, and this is precisely what the Roman
 Catholics maintain against all reason and logic.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>The concluding sentence of this sloka shows
 how archaic is the belief and the doctrine that man is seven-fold
 in his constitution. The thread of being which animates man and
 passes through all his personalities, or rebirths on this Earth
 (an allusion to Sutratma), the thread on which moreover all his
 "Spirits" are strung -- is spun from the essence of
 the "threefold," the "fourfold" and the "fivefold";
 which contain all the preceding. <em>Panchasikha</em>,<em> </em>agreeably
 to Bhagavata Purana (V. XX. 25-28), is one of the seven <em>Kumaras
 </em>who go to Sveta-Dvipa to worship Vishnu. We shall see further
 on, what connection there is between the "celibate"
 and chaste sons of Brahma, who refuse "to multiply,"
 and terrestrial mortals. Meanwhile it is evident that "the
 Man-Plant," Saptaparna, thus refers to the seven principles,
 and man is compared to the seven-leaved plant of this name* so
 sacred among Buddhists.
 </p><p>
 For further details as to Saptaparna and the importance of the
 number seven in occultism, as well as in symbology, the reader
 is referred to Part II., Book II., on Symbolism: Sections on "<em>Saptaparna</em>,"<em>
 </em>"The Septenary in the Vedas," etc. etc.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Egyptian allegory in the "Book of the Dead" already
 mentioned, the hymn that relates to the reward "of the Soul,"
 is as suggestive of our Septenary Doctrine as it is poetical.
 The deceased is allotted a piece of land in the field of Aanroo,
 wherein the Manes, the deified shades of the dead, glean, as the
 harvest they have sown by their actions in life, the corn seven
 cubits high, which grows in a territory divided into 14 and 7
 portions. This corn is the food on which they live and prosper,
 or that will kill them, in Amenti, the realm of which the Aanroo
 field is a domain. For, as said in the hymn, (see chap. xxxii.
 9) the deceased is either destroyed therein, or becomes pure spirit
 for the Eternity, in consequence of the "Seven times seventy-seven
 lives" passed or to be passed on Earth. The idea of the corn
 reaped as the "fruit of our actions" is very graphic.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 237 THE IMMORTAL ROOT.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA VII. -- <em>Continued.</em> </h4>
 
 <p>
 4. <strong>I</strong>T IS THE ROOT THAT NEVER DIES, THE THREE-TONGUED
 FLAME OF THE FOUR WICKS* (<em>a</em>) . . . <strong>T</strong>HE
 WICKS ARE THE SPARKS, THAT DRAW FROM THE THREE-TONGUED FLAME (<em>their
 upper triad</em>)<em> </em>SHOT OUT BY THE SEVEN, THEIR FLAME;
 THE BEAMS AND SPARKS OF ONE MOON REFLECTED IN THE RUNNING WAVES
 OF ALL THE RIVERS OF THE EARTH ("<em>Bhumi</em>,"<em>
 or </em>"<em>Prithivi</em>")**<em> </em>(<em>b</em>)<em>.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The "Three-tongued flame" that never dies
 is the immortal spiritual triad -- the Atma-Buddhi and Manas --
 the fruition of the latter assimilated by the first two after
 every terrestrial life. The "four wicks" that go out
 and are extinguished, are the four lower principles, including
 the body.
 </p><p>
 "I am the three-wicked Flame and my wicks are immortal,"
 says the defunct. "I enter into the domain of Sekhem (the
 God whose arm sows the seed of action produced by the disembodied
 soul) and I enter the region of the Flames who have destroyed
 their adversaries," <em>i.e.</em>, got rid of the sin-creating
 "four wicks." (See chap. i., vii., "Book of the
 Dead," and the "Mysteries of Ro-stan.")
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) Just as milliards of bright sparks dance on the waters
 of an ocean above which one and the same moon is shining, so our
 evanescent personalities -- the illusive envelopes of the immortal
 MONAD-EGO -- twinkle and dance on the waves of Maya. They last
 and appear, as the thousands of sparks produced by the moon-beams,
 only so long as the Queen of the Night radiates her lustre on
 the running waters of life: the period of a Manvantara; and then
 they disappear, the beams -- symbols of our eternal Spiritual
 Egos -- alone surviving, re-merged in, and being, as they were
 before, one with the Mother-Source.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The three-tongued flame of the four wicks corresponds to the
 four unities and the three Binaries of the Sephirothal tree (see
 Commentary on Stanza VI.).
 </p><p>
 ** Useless to repeat again that the terms given here are Sanskrit
 translations; for the original terms, unknown and unheard of in
 Europe, would only puzzle the reader more, and serve no useful
 purpose.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-1-12.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>