<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 53 THE STATE OF PARANIRVANA.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA II.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>C</strong>OMMENTARY.
 </p><p>
 1. . . . . <strong>W</strong>HERE WERE THE BUILDERS, THE LUMINOUS
 SONS OF MANVANTARIC DAWN (<em>a</em>)? . . . . IN THE UNKNOWN
 DARKNESS IN THEIR <strong>A</strong>H-HI (<em>Chohanic, Dhyani-Buddhic</em>)<em>
 </em><strong>P</strong>ARANISHPANNA, THE PRODUCERS OF FORM (<em>rupa</em>)<em>
 </em>FROM NO-FORM (<em>arupa</em>)<em>, </em>THE ROOT OF THE WORLD
 -- THE <strong>D</strong>EVAMATRI* AND <strong>S</strong>VABHAVAT,
 RESTED IN THE BLISS OF NON-BEING (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The "Builders," the "Sons of Manvantaric
 Dawn," are the real creators of the Universe; and in this
 doctrine, which deals only with our Planetary System, they, as
 the architects of the latter, are also called the "Watchers"
 of the Seven Spheres, which exoterically are the Seven planets,
 and esoterically the seven earths or spheres (planets) of our
 chain also. The opening sentence of Stanza I., when mentioning
 "Seven Eternities," is made to apply both to the <em>Maha-Kalpa
 </em>or "the (great) Age of Brahma," as well as to the
 Solar <em>pralaya </em>and subsequent resurrection of our Planetary
 System on a higher plane. There are many kinds of <em>pralaya
 </em>(dissolution of a thing visible), as will be shown elsewhere.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) Paranishpanna, remember, is the <em>summum bonum</em>,<em>
 </em>the Absolute, hence the same as Paranirvana. Besides being
 the final state it is that condition of subjectivity which has
 no relation to anything but the one absolute truth (Para-marthasatya)
 on its plane. It is that state which leads one to appreciate correctly
 the full meaning of Non-Being, which, as explained, is <em>absolute
 </em>Being. Sooner or later, all that now <em>seemingly </em>exists,
 will be in reality and actually in the state of Paranishpanna.
 But there is a great difference between <em>conscious </em>and<em>
 unconscious </em>"being."<em> </em>The condition of
 Paranishpanna, without Paramartha, the Self-analys-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 "Mother of the Gods," Aditi, or Cosmic Space. In the
 Zohar, she is called Sephira the Mother of the Sephiroth, and
 Shekinah in her primordial form, <em>in</em> <em>abscondito.</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 54 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ing consciousness (Svasamvedana), is no bliss, but simply extinction
 (for Seven Eternities). Thus, an iron ball placed under the scorching
 rays of the sun will get heated through, but will not feel or
 appreciate the warmth, while a man will. It is only "with
 a mind clear and undarkened by personality, and an assimilation
 of the merit of manifold existences devoted to being in its collectivity
 (the whole living and sentient Universe)," that one gets
 rid of personal existence, merging into, becoming one with, the
 Absolute,* and continuing in full possession of Paramartha.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA II. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 2. . . . . <strong>W</strong>HERE WAS SILENCE? <strong>W</strong>HERE
 WERE THE EARS TO SENSE IT? <strong>N</strong>O! <strong>T</strong>HERE
 WAS NEITHER SILENCE, NOR SOUND (<em>a</em>). <strong>N</strong>AUGHT
 SAVE CEASELESS, ETERNAL BREATH (<em>Motion</em>)<em> </em>WHICH
 KNOWS ITSELF NOT (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The idea that things can cease to exist and still
 BE, is a fundamental one in Eastern psychology. Under this apparent
 contradiction in terms, there rests a fact of Nature to realise
 which in the mind, rather than to argue about words, is the important
 thing. A familiar instance of a similar paradox is afforded by
 chemical combination. The question whether Hydrogen and Oxygen
 cease to exist, when they combine to form water, is still a moot
 one, some arguing that since they are found again when the water
 is decomposed they must be there all the while; others contending
 that as they actually turn into something totally different they
 must cease to exist as themselves for the time being; but neither
 side is able to form the faintest conception of the real condition
 of a thing, which has become something else and yet has not ceased
 to be itself. Existence as water may be said to be, for Oxygen
 and Hydrogen, a state of Non-being which is "more real being"
 than their existence as gases; and it may faintly symbolise the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Hence<em> Non-being </em>is "<strong>A</strong>BSOLUTE
 Being," in esoteric philosophy. In the tenets of the latter
 even Adi-Budha (first or primeval wisdom) is, while manifested,
 in one sense an illusion, Maya, since all the gods, including
 Brahma, have to die at the end of the "Age of Brahma";
 the abstraction called Parabrahm alone -- whether we call it Ensoph,
 or Herbert Spencer's Unknowable -- being "the One Absolute"
 Reality. The One secondless Existence is ADWAITA, "Without
 a Second," and all the rest is <em>Maya, </em>teaches the
 Adwaita philosophy. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 55 THE ABSOLUTE KNOWS ITSELF NOT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 condition of the Universe when it goes to sleep, or ceases to
 be, during the "Nights of Brahma" -- to awaken or reappear
 again, when the dawn of the new Manvantara recalls it to what
 we call existence.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>The "Breath" of the One Existence
 is used in its application only to the spiritual aspect of Cosmogony
 by Archaic esotericism; otherwise, it is replaced by its equivalent
 in the material plane -- Motion. The One Eternal Element, or element-containing
 Vehicle, is <em>Space</em>, dimensionless in every sense; co-existent
 with which are -- endless <em>duration</em>, primordial (hence
 indestructible) <em>matter</em>, and<em> motion</em> --<em> </em>absolute
 "perpetual motion" which is the "breath" of
 the "One" Element. This breath, as seen, can never cease,
 not even during the Pralayic eternities. (<em>See </em>"<em>Chaos</em>,<em>
 Theos</em>,<em> Kosmos</em>,"<em> </em>in Part II.)
 </p><p>
 But the "Breath of the One Existence" does not, all
 the same, apply to the <em>One Causeless Cause </em>or the "All
 Be-ness" (in contradistinction to All-Being, which is Brahma,
 or the Universe). Brahma (or Hari) the four-faced god who, after
 lifting the Earth out of the waters, "accomplished the Creation,"
 is held to be only the instrumental, and not, as clearly implied,
 the ideal Cause. No Orientalist, so far, seems to have thoroughly
 comprehended the real sense of the verses in the Purana, that
 treat of "creation."
 </p><p>
 Therein Brahma is the cause of the potencies that are to be generated
 subsequently for the work of "creation." When a translator
 says, "And from him proceed the potencies to be created,
 after they had become the real cause": "and from IT
 proceed the potencies that <i>will </i><em>create </em>as they
 <em>become </em>the real cause" (on the material plane) would
 perhaps be more correct? Save that one (causeless) ideal cause
 there is no other to which the universe can be referred. "Worthiest
 of ascetics! through its potency -- <em>i.e.</em>, through the
 potency of that cause -- every created thing comes by its inherent
 or proper nature." If, in the Vedanta and Nyaya, <em>nimitta
 </em>is the efficient cause, as contrasted with <em>upadana, </em>the
 material cause, (and in the Sankhya, <em>pradhana </em>implies
 the functions of both); in the Esoteric philosophy, which reconciles
 all these systems, and the nearest exponent of which is the Vedanta
 as expounded by the Advaita Vedantists, none but the <em>upadana
 </em>can be speculated upon; that which is in the minds of the
 Vaishnavas (the Vasishta-dvaita) as the ideal in contradistinction
 to the real -- or Parabrahm and Isvara -- can find no room in
 published speculations, since</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 56 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 that ideal even is a misnomer, when applied to that of which no
 human reason, even that of an adept, can conceive.
 </p><p>
 To know itself or oneself, necessitates consciousness and perception
 (both limited faculties in relation to any subject except Parabrahm),
 to be cognized. Hence the "Eternal Breath which knows itself
 not." Infinity cannot comprehend Finiteness. The Boundless
 can have no relation to the bounded and the conditioned. In the
 occult teachings, the Unknown and the Unknowable MOVER, or the
 Self-Existing, is the absolute divine Essence. And thus being
 <em>Absolute </em>Consciousness, and <em>Absolute </em>Motion
 -- to the limited senses of those who describe this indescribable
 -- it is unconsciousness and immoveableness. Concrete consciousness
 cannot be predicated of abstract Consciousness, any more than
 the quality wet can be predicated of water -- wetness being its
 own attribute and the cause of the wet quality in other things.
 Consciousness implies limitations and qualifications; something
 to be conscious of, and someone to be conscious of it. But Absolute
 Consciousness contains the cognizer, the thing cognized and the
 cognition, all three in itself and all three <em>one. </em>No
 man is conscious of more than that portion of his knowledge that
 happens to have been recalled to his mind at any particular time,
 yet such is the poverty of language that we have no term to distinguish
 the knowledge not actively thought of, from knowledge we are unable
 to recall to memory. To forget is synonymous with not to remember.
 How much greater must be the difficulty of finding terms to describe,
 and to distinguish between, abstract metaphysical facts or differences.
 It must not be forgotten, also, that we give names to things according
 to the appearances they assume for ourselves. We call absolute
 consciousness "unconsciousness," because it seems to
 us that it must necessarily be so, just as we call the Absolute,
 "Darkness," because to our finite understanding it appears
 quite impenetrable, yet we recognize fully that our perception
 of such things does not do them justice. We involuntarily distinguish
 in our minds, for instance, between unconscious absolute consciousness,
 and unconsciousness, by secretly endowing the former with some
 indefinite quality that corresponds, on a higher plane than our
 thoughts can reach, with what we know as consciousness in ourselves.
 But this is not any kind of consciousness that we can manage to
 distinguish from what appears to us as unconsciousness.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 57 THE GERM OF LIFE.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA II. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 3. <strong>T</strong>HE HOUR HAD NOT YET STRUCK; THE RAY HAD NOT
 YET FLASHED INTO THE GERM (<em>a</em>); THE MATRI-PADMA (<em>mother
 lotus</em>)<em> </em>HAD NOT YET SWOLLEN (<em>b</em>).*
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The ray of the "Ever Darkness" becomes,
 as it is emitted, a ray of effulgent light or life, and flashes
 into the "Germ" -- the point in the Mundane Egg, represented
 by matter in its abstract sense. But the term "Point"
 must not be understood as applying to any particular point in
 Space, for a germ exists in the centre of every atom, and these
 collectively form "the Germ;" or rather, as no atom
 can be made visible to our physical eye, the collectivity of these
 (if the term can be applied to something which is boundless and
 infinite) forms the noumenon of eternal and indestructible matter.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>One of the symbolical figures for the Dual
 creative power in Nature (matter and force on the material plane)
 is <em>Padma</em>, the water-lily of India. The Lotus is the product
 of heat (fire) and water (vapour or Ether); fire standing in every
 philosophical and religious system as a representation of the
 Spirit of Deity,** the active, male, generative principle; and
 Ether, or the Soul of matter, the light of the fire, for the passive
 female principle from which everything in this Universe emanated.
 Hence, Ether or Water is the Mother, and Fire is the Father. Sir
 W. Jones (and before him archaic botany) showed that the seeds
 of the Lotus contain -- even before they germinate -- perfectly
 formed leaves, the miniature shape of what one day, as perfect
 plants, they will become: nature thus giving us a specimen of
 the preformation of its production . . . the seed of all phanerogamous
 plants bearing proper flowers containing an embryo plantlet ready
 formed.*** (See Part II., "The Lotus Flower as an Universal
 Symbol.") This explains the sentence "The Mother had
 not yet swollen" -- the form being usually sacrificed to
 the inner or root idea in Archaic symbology.
 </p><p>
 The Lotus, or Padma, is, moreover, a very ancient and favourite
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * An unpoetical term, yet still very graphic. (See foot-note to
 Stanza III.)
 </p><p>
 ** Even in Christianity. (See Part II., "Primordial Substance
 and Divine Thought.")
 </p><p>
 *** Gross, "The Heathen Religion," p. 195.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 58 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 simile for the Kosmos itself, and also for man. The popular reasons
 given are, firstly, the fact just mentioned, that the Lotus-seed
 contains within itself a perfect miniature of the future plant,
 which typifies the fact that the spiritual prototypes of all things
 exist in the immaterial world before those things become materialised
 on Earth. Secondly, the fact that the Lotus plant grows up through
 the water, having its root in the Ilus, or mud, and spreading
 its flower in the air above. The Lotus thus typifies the life
 of man and also that of the Kosmos; for the Secret Doctrine teaches
 that the elements of both are the same, and that both are developing
 in the same direction. The root of the Lotus sunk in the mud represents
 material life, the stalk passing up through the water typifies
 existence in the astral world, and the flower floating on the
 water and opening to the sky is emblematical of spiritual being.
 </p><h4>STANZA II. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 4. <strong>H</strong>ER HEART HAD NOT YET OPENED FOR THE ONE RAY
 TO ENTER, THENCE TO FALL AS THREE INTO FOUR IN THE LAP OF <strong>M</strong>AYA
 (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The Primordial Substance had not yet passed out of
 its precosmic latency into differentiated objectivity, or even
 become the (to man, so far,) invisible Protyle of Science. But,
 as the hour strikes and it becomes receptive of the Fohatic impress
 of the Divine Thought (the Logos, or the male aspect of the Anima
 Mundi, Alaya) -- its heart opens. It differentiates, and the THREE
 (Father, Mother, Son) are transformed into four. Herein lies the
 origin of the double mystery of the Trinity and the immaculate
 Conception. The first and Fundamental dogma of Occultism is Universal
 Unity (or Homogeneity) under three aspects. This led to a possible
 conception of Deity, which as an absolute unity must remain forever
 incomprehensible to finite intellects. "If thou wouldest
 believe in the Power which acts within the root of a plant, or
 imagine the root concealed under the soil, thou hast to think
 of its stalk or trunk and of its leaves and flowers. Thou canst
 not imagine that Power independently of these objects. Life can
 be known only by the Tree of Life. . . ." (Precepts for Yoga).
 The idea of <em>Absolute </em>Unity </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 59 ASTRAL LIGHT IS NOT THE ANIMA MUNDI.</h6>
 
 <p>
 would be broken entirely in our conception, had we not something
 concrete before our eyes to contain that Unity. And the deity
 being absolute, must be omnipresent, hence not an atom but contains
 IT within itself. The roots, the trunk and its many branches are
 three distinct objects, yet they are one tree. Say the Kabalists:
 "The Deity is one, because It is infinite. It is triple,
 because it is ever manifesting." This manifestation is triple
 in its aspects, for it requires, as Aristotle has it, three principles
 for every natural body to become objective: privation, form, and
 matter.* Privation meant in the mind of the great philosopher
 that which the Occultists call the prototypes impressed in the
 Astral Light -- the lowest plane and world of Anima Mundi. The
 union of these three principles depends upon a fourth -- the LIFE
 which radiates from the summits of the Unreachable, to become
 an universally diffused Essence on the manifested planes of Existence.
 And this QUATERNARY (Father, Mother, Son, as a UNITY, and a quaternary,
 as a living manifestation) has been the means of leading to the
 very archaic Idea of Immaculate Conception, now finally crystallized
 into a dogma of the Christian Church, which carnalized this metaphysical
 idea beyond any common sense. For one has but to read the Kabala
 and study its numerical methods of interpretation to find the
 origin of that dogma. It is purely astronomical, mathematical,
 and pre-eminently metaphysical: the Male element in Nature (personified
 by the male deities and Logoi -- Viraj, or Brahma; Horus, or Osiris,
 etc., etc.) is born through, not from, an immaculate source, personified
 by the "Mother"; because that Male having a Mother cannot
 have a "Father" -- the abstract Deity being sexless,
 and not even a Being but Be-ness, or Life itself. Let us render
 this in the mathematical language of the author of "The Source
 of Measures." Speaking of the "Measure of a Man"
 and his numerical (Kabalistic) value, he writes that in Genesis,
 ch. iv., v. 1, "It is called the 'Man even Jehovah'
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * A Vedantin of the Visishtadwaita philosophy would say that,
 though the only independent Reality, Parabrahmam is inseparable
 from his trinity. That He is three, "Parabrahmam, Chit, and
 Achit," the last two being dependent realities unable to
 exist separately; or, to make it clearer, Parabrahmam is the SUBSTANCE
 -- changeless, eternal, and incognizable -- and Chit (Atma), and
 Achit (Anatma) are its qualities, as form and colour are the qualities
 of any object. The two are the garment, or body, or rather attribute
 (Sarira) of Parabrahmam. But an Occultist would find much to say
 against this claim, and so would the Adwaitee Vedantin.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page 60]] THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Measure, and this is obtained in this way, viz.: 113 x 5 = 565,
 and the value 565 can be placed under the form of expression 56.5
 x 10 = 565. Here the Man-number 113 becomes a factor of 56.5 x
 10, and the (Kabalistic) reading of this last numbered expression
 is Jod, He, Vau, He, or Jehovah. . . . The expansion of 565 into
 56.5 x 10 is purposed to show the emanation of the male (Jod)
 from the female (Eva) principle; or, so to speak, the birth of
 a male element from an immaculate source, in other words, an immaculate
 conception."
 </p><p>
 Thus is repeated on Earth the mystery enacted, according to the
 Seers, on the divine plane. The "Son" of the immaculate
 Celestial Virgin (or the undifferentiated cosmic protyle, Matter
 in its infinitude) is born again on Earth as the Son of the terrestrial
 Eve -- our mother Earth, and becomes Humanity as a total -- past,
 present, and future -- for Jehovah or Jod-he-vau-he is androgyne,
 or both male and female. Above, the Son is the whole <strong>K</strong>OSMOS;
 below, he is <strong>M</strong>ANKIND. The triad or triangle becomes
 Tetraktis, the Sacred Pythagorean number, the perfect Square,
 and a 6-faced cube on Earth. The Macroprosopus (the Great Face)
 is now Microprosopus (the lesser face); or, as the Kabalists have
 it, the "Ancient of Days," descending on Adam Kadmon
 whom he uses as his vehicle to manifest through, gets transformed
 into Tetragrammaton. It is now in the "Lap of Maya,"
 the Great Illusion, and between itself and the Reality has the
 Astral Light, the great Deceiver of man's limited senses, unless
 Knowledge through Paramarthasatya comes to the rescue.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA II. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 5. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>S</strong>EVEN (<em>Sons</em>)<em>
 WERE </em>NOT YET BORN FROM THE <strong>W</strong>EB OF <strong>L</strong>IGHT.
 <strong>D</strong>ARKNESS ALONE WAS <strong>F</strong>ATHER-<strong>M</strong>OTHER,
 <strong>S</strong>VABHAVAT, AND <strong>S</strong>VABHAVAT WAS
 IN DARKNESS (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The Secret Doctrine, in the Stanzas given here, occupies
 itself chiefly, if not entirely, with our Solar System, and especially
 with our planetary chain. The "Seven Sons," therefore,
 are the creators of the latter. This teaching will be explained
 more fully hereafter. (See Part II., "Theogony of the Creative
 Gods.")</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 61 DIVINE THOUGHT, DIVINE THINKERS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Svabhavat, the "Plastic Essence" that fills the Universe,
 is the root of all things. Svabhavat is, so to say, the Buddhistic
 concrete aspect of the abstraction called in Hindu philosophy
 <em>Mulaprakriti. </em>It is the body of the Soul, and that which
 Ether would be to Akasa, the latter being the informing principle
 of the former. Chinese mystics have made of it the synonym of
 "being." In the <em>Ekasloka-Shastra </em>of<em> Nagarjuna
 </em>(the<em> Lung-shu </em>of China) called by the Chinese the
 <em>Yih-shu-lu-kia-lun</em>,<em> </em>it is said that the original
 word of Yeu is "Being" or "Subhava," "the
 Substance giving substance to itself," also explained by
 him as meaning " without action and with action," "the
 nature which has no nature of its own." <em>Subhava</em>,<em>
 </em>from which <em>Svabhavat</em>,<em> </em>is composed of two
 words: Su "fair," "handsome," "good";
 Sva, "self"; and bhava, "being" or "states
 of being."
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA II. -- <em>Continued</em>. </h4>
 
 <p>
 6. <strong>T</strong>HESE TWO ARE THE <strong>G</strong>ERM, AND
 THE <strong>G</strong>ERM IS -- ONE. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>U</strong>NIVERSE
 WAS STILL CONCEALED IN THE <strong>D</strong>IVINE <strong>T</strong>HOUGHT
 AND THE <strong>D</strong>IVINE <strong>B</strong>OSOM.
 </p><p>
 The "<em>Divine Thought</em>"<em> </em>does not imply
 the idea of a Divine thinker. The Universe, not only past, present,
 and future -- which is a human and finite idea expressed by finite
 thought -- but in its totality, the <em>Sat </em>(an untranslateable
 term), the absolute being, with the Past and Future crystallized
 in an eternal Present, is that Thought itself reflected in a secondary
 or manifest cause. Brahma (neuter) as the Mysterium Magnum of
 Paracelsus is an absolute mystery to the human mind. Brahma, the
 male-female, its aspect and anthropomorphic reflection, is conceivable
 to the perceptions of blind faith, though rejected by human intellect
 when it attains its majority. (See Part II., "Primordial
 Substance and Divine Thought.")
 </p><p>
 Hence the statement that during the prologue, so to say, of the
 drama of Creation, or the beginning of cosmic evolution, the Universe
 or the "Son" lies still concealed "in the Divine
 Thought," which had not yet penetrated "into the Divine
 Bosom." This idea, note well, is at the root, and forms the
 origin of all the allegories about the "Sons of God"
 born of immaculate virgins.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-1-04.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>