<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page 475]]</h6>
 
 <h4>BOOK I. -- PART III.</h4>
 
 <h4>ADDENDA.</h4>
 
 <h2>SCIENCE AND THE SECRET<br>
 DOCTRINE CONTRASTED.</h2>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The knowledge of this nether world --<br>
 Say, friend, what is it, false or true?<br>
 The false, what mortal cares to know?<br>
 The true, what mortal ever knew?" 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page 476]]</h6>
 
 <p>
 CONTENTS.
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 PAGE
 </p><p>
 I. <strong>R</strong>EASONS FOR THESE <strong>A</strong>DDENDA
 ... 477
 </p><p>
 II.<strong>M</strong>ODERN <strong>P</strong>HYSICISTS ARE <strong>P</strong>LAYING
 AT <strong>B</strong>LIND <strong>M</strong>AN'S <strong>B</strong>UFF
 ... 482
 </p><p>
 III. "<strong>A</strong>N <strong>L</strong>UMEN <strong>S</strong>IT
 <strong>C</strong>ORPUS, <strong>N</strong>EC <strong>N</strong>ON"
 ... 483
 </p><p>
 IV. <strong>I</strong>S <strong>G</strong>RAVITATION A <strong>L</strong>AW?
 ... 490
 </p><p>
 V. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>T</strong>HEORIES OF <strong>R</strong>OTATION
 IN <strong>S</strong>CIENCE ... 500
 </p><p>
 VI. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>M</strong>ASKS OF <strong>S</strong>CIENCE
 ... 506
 </p><p>
 VII. <strong>A</strong>N <strong>A</strong>TTACK ON THE <strong>S</strong>CIENTIFIC
 <strong>T</strong>HEORY OF <strong>F</strong>ORCE BY A <strong>M</strong>AN
 OF <strong>S</strong>CIENCE ... 523
 </p><p>
 VIII. <strong>L</strong>IFE, <strong>F</strong>ORCE, OR <strong>G</strong>RAVITY?
 ... 529
 </p><p>
 IX. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>S</strong>OLAR <strong>T</strong>HEORY
 ... 540
 </p><p>
 X. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>C</strong>OMING <strong>F</strong>ORCE
 ... 554
 </p><p>
 XI. <strong>O</strong>N THE <strong>E</strong>LEMENTS AND <strong>A</strong>TOMS
 ... 566
 </p><p>
 XII. <strong>A</strong>NCIENT <strong>T</strong>HOUGHT IN <strong>M</strong>ODERN
 <strong>D</strong>RESS ... 579
 </p><p>
 XIII. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>M</strong>ODERN <strong>N</strong>EBULAR
 <strong>T</strong>HEORY ... 588
 </p><p>
 XIV. <strong>F</strong>ORCES -- <strong>M</strong>ODES OF <strong>M</strong>OTION
 OR <strong>I</strong>NTELLIGENCES? ... 601
 </p><p>
 XV. <strong>G</strong>ODS, <strong>M</strong>ONADS, AND <strong>A</strong>TOMS
 ... 610
 </p><p>
 XVI. <strong>C</strong>YCLIC <strong>E</strong>VOLUTION AND <strong>K</strong>ARMA
 ... 634
 </p><p>
 XVII. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>Z</strong>ODIAC AND ITS <strong>A</strong>NTIQUITY
 ... 647
 </p><p>
 XVIII. <strong>S</strong>UMMARY OF THE <strong>M</strong>UTUAL
 <strong>P</strong>OSITION ... 668</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 477 MUTUAL POSITION DEFINED.</h6>
 
 <h3>ADDENDA TO BOOK I.</h3>
 
 <p>
 --------------
 </p><h4>I.<br>
 REASONS FOR THESE ADDENDA.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>M</strong>ANY of the doctrines contained in the foregoing
 Seven Stanzas and Commentaries having been studied and critically
 examined by some Western Theosophists, certain of the occult teachings
 have been found wanting from the ordinary stand-point of modern
 scientific knowledge. They seemed to encounter insuperable difficulties
 in the way of their acceptance, and to require reconsideration
 in view of scientific criticism. Some friends have already been
 tempted to regret the necessity of so often calling in question
 the assertions of modern Science. It appeared to them -- and I
 here repeat only their arguments -- that "to run counter
 to the teachings of its most eminent exponents, was to court a
 premature discomfiture in the eyes of the Western World."
 </p><p>
 It is, therefore, desirable to define once and for all the position
 which the writer, who does not agree in this with her friends,
 intends to maintain. So far as Science remains what in the words
 of Prof. Huxley it is, viz., "organized common sense";
 so far as its inferences are drawn from accurate premises -- its
 generalizations resting on a purely inductive basis -- every Theosophist
 and Occultist welcomes respectfully and with due admiration its
 contributions to the domain of cosmological law. There can be
 no possible conflict between the teachings of occult and so-called
 exact Science, where the conclusions of the latter are grounded
 on a substratum of unassailable fact. It is only when its more
 ardent exponents, over-stepping the limits of observed phenomena
 in order to penetrate into the arcana of Being, attempt to wrench
 the formation of Kosmos and its <em>living </em>Forces from Spirit,
 and attribute all to blind matter, that the Occultists claim the
 right to dispute and call in question their theories. Science
 cannot, owing to the very nature of things, unveil the mystery
 of the universe around us. Science can, it is true, collect, classify,
 and generalize upon phenomena; but the occultist, arguing from
 admitted metaphysical data, declares that the daring explorer,
 who would probe the inmost secrets of Nature, must transcend the
 narrow limitations of sense, and transfer his consciousness into
 the region of noumena and the sphere of primal causes. To effect
 this, he must develop faculties which are absolutely</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 478 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 dormant -- save in a few rare and exceptional cases -- in the
 constitution of the off-shoots of our present Fifth Root-race
 in Europe and America. He can in no other conceivable manner collect
 the facts on which to base his speculations. Is this not apparent
 on the principles of Inductive Logic and Metaphysics alike?
 </p><p>
 On the other hand, whatever the writer may do, she will never
 be able to satisfy both Truth and Science. To offer the reader
 a systematic and uninterrupted version of the Archaic Stanzas
 is impossible. A gap of 43 verses or <em>Slokas </em>has to be
 left between the 7th (already given) and the 51st, which is the
 subject of Book II., though the latter are made to run from 1
 <em>et seq. </em>for easier reading and reference. The appearance
 of man on Earth alone occupies as many stanzas, which describe
 minutely his primal evolution from the human Dhyan Chohans; the
 state of the globe at that time, etc., etc. A great number of
 names referring to chemical substances and other compounds, which
 have now ceased to combine together, and are therefore unknown
 to the later offshoots of our Fifth Race, occupy a considerable
 space. As they are simply untranslateable, and would remain in
 every case inexplicable, they are omitted, along with those which
 cannot be made public. Nevertheless, even the little that is given
 will irritate any follower and defender of dogmatic materialistic
 Science who happens to read this.
 </p><p>
 Before proceeding to other Stanzas, it is proposed, therefore,
 to defend those already given. They are not in perfect accord
 or harmony with modern Science -- this we all know. Had they been,
 however, as much in agreement with the views of modern knowledge
 as a lecture by Sir W. Thomson, they would have been rejected
 all the same. For they teach belief in conscious Powers and Spiritual
 Entities; in terrestrial, semi-intelligent, and highly intellectual
 Forces on other planes*; and in Beings that dwell around us in
 spheres imperceptible, whether through telescope or microscope.
 Hence the necessity of examining the beliefs of materialistic
 Science: of comparing its views about the "Elements"
 with the opinions of the ancients, and of analysing the physical
 Forces as they exist in modern perception before the Occultists
 admit themselves to be in the wrong. We shall touch upon the constitution
 of the Sun and planets, and the occult characteristics of what
 are called <em>Devas </em>and<em> Genii</em>, and are now termed
 by Science, Force, or "modes of motion," and see whether
 esoteric belief is defensible or not (<em>Vide infra</em>, "<em>Gods</em>,<em>
 Monads</em>,<em> and Atoms</em>)".<em> </em>Notwithstanding
 the efforts made to the contrary, an unprejudiced mind will discover
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Their intellection, of course, being of quite a different nature
 to any we can conceive of on Earth.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 479 DUAL NATURE OF THE SUN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 under Newton's "agent, material or immaterial" (of his
 third letter to Bentley), the agent which <em>causes gravity</em>,
 and, in his personal <em>working </em>God, one finds just as much
 of the metaphysical <em>devas </em>and<em> genii</em>, as in Kepler's
 <em>angelus rector </em>conducting each planet, and the <em>species
 immateriata </em>by which the celestial bodies were carried along
 in their courses, according to that astronomer.
 </p><p>
 We shall have, in Book II., to openly approach dangerous subjects.
 We must bravely face Science and declare, in the teeth of materialistic
 learning, of Idealism, Hylo-Idealism, Positivism and all-denying
 modern Psychology, that the true Occultist believes in "Lords
 of Light;" that he believes in a Sun, which, far from being
 simply "a lamp of day" moving in accordance with physical
 law, and far from being merely one of those Suns, which according
 to Richter -- ". . . . are Sun-flowers of a higher light"
 -- is, like milliards of other Suns, the dwelling or the vehicle
 of a god, and a host of gods.
 </p><p>
 In this question, of course, it is the Occultists who will be
 worsted. They will be considered on the <em>prima facie </em>aspect
 of the dispute to be ignoramuses, and labelled with more than
 one of the usual epithets given to those whom the superficially
 judging public, itself ignorant of the great underlying truths
 in nature, accuses of believing in mediaeval superstitions. Let
 it be so. Submitting beforehand to every criticism in order to
 go on with their task, they only claim the privilege of showing
 that the physicists are as much at loggerheads among themselves
 in their speculations, as the latter are with the teachings of
 Occultism.
 </p><p>
 The Sun is matter, and the Sun is Spirit. Our ancestors -- the
 "heathen," -- along with their modern successors, the
 Parsis -- were, and are, wise enough in their generation to see
 in it the symbol of Divinity, and at the same time to sense within,
 concealed by the physical Symbol, the bright God of Spiritual
 and terrestrial Light. Such belief is now regarded as a superstition
 only by rank materialism, which denies Deity, Spirit, Soul, and
 admits no intelligence outside the mind of man. But if too much
 of wrong superstition bred by "Churchianity" -- as Lawrence
 Oliphant calls it -- "renders a man a fool," too much
 scepticism makes him mad. We prefer the charge of folly in believing
 too much, to that of a madness which denies everything, as do
 Materialism and Idealism. Hence, the Occultists are fully prepared
 to receive their dues from Materialism, and to meet the adverse
 criticism which will be poured on this work, not for writing it,
 but <em>for believing in that which it contains.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Therefore the discoveries, hypotheses, and unavoidable objections
 which will be brought forward by the scientific critics must be
 anticipated and disposed of. It has also to be shown how far the
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 480 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 occult teachings depart from real science, and whether the ancient
 or the modern theories are the most logically and philosophically
 correct. The unity and mutual relations of all parts of Kosmos
 were known to the ancients, before they became evident to modern
 astronomers and philosophers. And if even the external and visible
 portions of the Universe and their mutual relations cannot be
 explained in any other terms than those used by the adherents
 of the mechanical theory of the Universe in physical science,
 it follows that no materialist, who denies that the Soul of Kosmos
 (which appertains to metaphysical philosophy) exists, has the
 right to trespass upon that metaphysical domain. That physical
 science is trying to, and actually does, encroach upon it, is
 only one more proof that "might is right," and no more.
 </p><p>
 Another good reason for these Addenda is this. Since only a certain
 portion of the Secret teachings can be given out in the present
 age, if they were published without any explanations or commentary,
 the doctrines would never be understood even by theosophists.
 Therefore they must be contrasted with the speculations of modern
 science. Archaic axioms must be placed side by side with modern
 hypotheses and comparison left to the sagacious reader.
 </p><p>
 On the question of the "Seven Governors," as Hermes
 calls the "Seven Builders," the Spirits which guide
 the operations of nature, the animated atoms of which are the
 shadows, in their world, of their Primaries in the astral realms
 -- this work will, of course, besides the men of Science, have
 every materialist against it. But this opposition can, at most,
 be only temporary. People have laughed at everything and scouted
 every unpopular idea at first, and then ended by accepting it.
 Materialism and scepticism are evils that must remain in the world
 as long as man has not quitted his present gross form to don the
 one he had during the first and second races of this Round. Unless
 scepticism and our present natural ignorance are equilibrated
 by intuition and a natural spirituality, every being afflicted
 with such feelings will see in himself no better than a bundle
 of flesh, bones, and muscles, with an empty garret inside him
 which serves the purpose of storing his sensations and feelings.
 Sir Humphry Davy was a great scientist, as deeply versed in physics
 as any theorist of our day, yet he loathed materialism. "I
 heard with disgust," he says, "in the dissecting-rooms,
 the plan of the physiologist, of the gradual secretion of matter,
 and its becoming endued with irritability, ripening into sensibility,
 and acquiring such organs as were necessary, by its own inherent
 forces, and at last rising into intellectual existence."
 Nevertheless, physiologists are not the most to be blamed for
 speaking of that only which they can see and estimate on the evidence
 of their physical senses. Astronomers</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 481 THE SONS OF LIGHT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and physicists are, we consider, far more illogical in their materialistic
 views than even physiologists, and this has to be proved. Milton's
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . . . . . . . . . . "Light<br>
 Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure,"
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 has become with the materialists only --
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . . . . Prime cheerer, light,<br>
 Of all material beings, first and best.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 For the occultists it is both Spirit and Matter. Behind the "mode
 of motion," now regarded as "the property of matter"
 and nothing more, they perceive the radiant noumenon. It is the
 "Spirit of Light," the first born of the Eternal pure
 Element, whose energy (or emanation) is stored in the Sun, the
 great Life-Giver of the physical world, as the hidden Concealed
 Spiritual Sun is the Light- and Life-Giver of the Spiritual and
 Psychic Realms. Bacon was one of the first to strike the key-note
 of materialism, not only by his inductive method (renovated from
 ill-digested Aristotle), but by the general tenor of his writings.
 He inverts the order of mental Evolution when saying that "the
 first Creation of God was the light of the sense; the last was
 the light of the reason; and his Sabbath work ever since is the
 illumination of the Spirit." It is just the reverse. The
 light of Spirit is the eternal Sabbath of the mystic or occultist,
 and he pays little attention to that of mere sense. That which
 is meant by the allegorical sentence, "<em>Fiat Lux</em>"
 is,-- when esoterically rendered -- "Let there be the 'Sons
 of Light,' " or the noumena of all phenomena. Thus the Roman
 Catholics rightly interpret the passage as referring to Angels,
 and wrongly as meaning Powers created by an anthropomorphic God,
 whom they personify in the ever thundering and punishing Jehovah.
 </p><p>
 These beings are the "Sons of Light," because they emanate
 from, and are self-generated in, that infinite Ocean of Light,
 whose one pole is pure <em>Spirit </em>lost in the absoluteness
 of Non-Being, and the other, the <em>matter </em>in which it condenses,
 crystallizing into a more and more gross type as it descends into
 manifestation. Therefore matter, though it is, in one sense, but
 the illusive dregs of that Light whose limbs are the Creative
 Forces, yet has in it the full presence of the Soul thereof, of
 that Principle, which none -- not even the "Sons of Light,"
 evolved from its ABSOLUTE DARKNESS -- will ever know. The idea
 is as beautifully, as it is truthfully, expressed by Milton, who
 hails the holy Light, which is the --
 </p><blockquote>
 ". . . . . Offspring of Heaven, first-born,<br>
 And of th' Eternal co-eternal beam;<br>
 . . . . . Since God is light,<br>
 And never but in unapproached Light<br>
 Dwelt from Eternity,. dwelt then in thee<br>
 Bright effluence, of bright essence increate." 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-02.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>