<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page 643]]</h6>
 
 <h4>BOOK II. -- PART III.<br>
 ADDENDA.</h4>
 
 <h3>SCIENCE AND THE SECRET<br>
 DOCTRINE CONTRASTED.</h3>
 
 <p>
 "The knowledge of this nether world --<br>
 Say, friend, what is it, false or true?<br>
 The false, what mortal cares to know?<br>
 The true, what mortal ever knew?"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page 644]]</h6>
 
 <p>
 CONTENTS.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h6>§§ PAGE</h6>
 
 <p>
 I. ARCHAIC OR MODERN ANTHROPOLOGY? ... 645
 </p><p>
 <b>-------</b> 
 </p><p>
 II. <b>T</b>HE <b>A</b>NCESTORS <b>M</b>ANKIND IS <b>O</b>FFERED
 BY <b>S</b>CIENCE ... 656
 </p><p>
 Plastidular Souls, and Conscious Nerve-Cells ... 670
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 III. <b>T</b>HE <b>F</b>OSSIL <b>R</b>ELICS OF <b>M</b>AN AND
 THE <b>A</b>NTHROPOID <b>A</b>PE ... 675
 </p><p>
 Western Evolutionism: the comparative Anatomy of Man and Ape ...
 680<br>
 Darwinism and the Antiquity of Man: the Anthropoids and their
 Ancestry ... 685
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 IV. <b>O</b>N THE <b>D</b>URATION OF <b>G</b>EOLOGICAL <b>P</b>ERIODS,
 <b>R</b>ACE <b>C</b>YCLES, AND THE <b>A</b>NTIQUITY OF <b>M</b>AN
 ... 690
 </p><p>
 Modern Scientific Speculations thereon ... 694<br>
 On Chains of Planets and their Plurality ... 699<br>
 Esoteric Geological Chronology ... 709
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 V. <b>O</b>RGANIC <b>E</b>VOLUTION -- <b>C</b>REATIVE <b>C</b>ENTRES
 ... 731
 </p><p>
 The Origin and Evolution of the Mammalia ... 734<br>
 The European Palaeolithic Races ... 738
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 VI. <b>G</b>IANTS, <b>C</b>IVILIZATIONS, AND <b>S</b>UBMERGED
 <b>C</b>ONTINENTS TRACED IN <b>H</b>ISTORY ... 742
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 VII. <b>S</b>CIENTIFIC AND <b>G</b>EOLOGICAL <b>P</b>ROOFS OF
 THE <b>E</b>XISTENCE OF SEVERAL <b>S</b>UBMERGED <b>C</b>ONTINENTS
 ... 778</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 645 THE NEW MASTERS OF PROTESTANTISM.</h6>
 
 <h3>ADDENDA TO BOOK II.</h3>
 
 <h4>§ I.<br>
 ARCHAIC, OR MODERN ANTHROPOLOGY?</h4>
 
 <p>
 <b>W</b>HENEVER the question of the origin of man is offered seriously
 to an unbiassed, honest, and earnest man of science, the answer
 comes invariably: -- "<b>W</b>E DO NOT KNOW." De Quatrefages,
 in his agnostic attitude, is one of such anthropologists.
 </p><p>
 This does not imply that the rest of the men of science are neither
 fair-minded nor honest, as in such case our remark would be questionably
 discreet. But, it is estimated that 75 per cent. of European Scientists
 are Evolutionists. Are these representatives of modern thought
 all guilty of flagrant misrepresentation of the facts? No one
 says this -- but there are a few very exceptional cases. However,
 the Scientists in their anti-clerical enthusiasm and despair of
 any alternative theory to Darwinism, except that of "special
 creation," are unconsciously insincere in "forcing"
 a hypothesis the elasticity of which is inadequate, and which
 resents the severe strain to which it is now subjected. Insincerity
 on the same subject is, however, patent in ecclesiastical circles.
 Bishop Temple has come forward as a thorough-going supporter of
 Darwinism in his "Religion and Science." This clerical
 writer goes so far as to regard <i>Matter </i>-- after receiving
 its "primal impress" -- as the unaided evolver of all
 cosmic phenomena. This view only differs from that of Haeckel,
 in postulating a hypothetical deity at "the back of beyont,"
 a deity which stands entirely aloof from the interplay of forces.
 Such a metaphysical entity is no more the Theological God than
 that of Kant. Bishop Temple's truce with Materialistic Science
 is, in our opinion, impolitic -- apart from the fact that it involves
 a total rejection of the Biblical cosmogony. In the presence of
 this display of flunkeyism before the materialism of our "learned"
 age, we Occultists can but smile. But how about loyalty to the
 Masters such theological truants profess to serve, Christ, and
 Christendom at large?
 </p><p>
 However, we have no desire, for the present, to throw down the
 gauntlet to the clergy, our business being now with materialistic
 Science alone. The latter answers to our question, in the person
 of its best representatives "We do not know;" -- yet
 the majority of these act as though Omniscience was their heirloom,
 and they knew all things.
 </p><p>
 For, indeed, this negative reply has not prevented the majority
 of Scientists from speculating on that question, each seeking
 to have his</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 646 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 own special theory accepted to the exclusion of all others. Thus,
 from Maillet in 1748 down to Haeckel in 1870, theories on the
 origin of the human Race have differed as much as the personalities
 of their inventors themselves. Buffon, Bory de St. Vincent, Lamarck,
 E. G. St. Hilaire, Gaudry, Naudin, Wallace, Darwin, Owen, Haeckel,
 Filippi, Vogt, Huxley, Agassiz, etc., etc., each evolved a more
 or less scientific hypothesis of genesis. De Quatrefages arranges
 them in two principal groups -- one holding to a <i>rapid, </i>and
 the other to a very <i>gradual transmutation</i>;<i> </i>the<i>
 </i>former, favouring a new type (man) produced by a being entirely
 different; the latter teaching the evolution of man by progressive
 differentiation.
 </p><p>
 Strangely enough, it is from the most scientific of these authorities
 that the most unscientific of all the theories upon the subject
 of the origin of man has hitherto emanated. This is so evident,
 that the hour is rapidly approaching when the current teaching
 about the descent of man from an Ape-like mammal will be regarded
 with less respect than the formation of Adam out of clay, and
 of Eve out of Adam's rib. For --
 </p><blockquote>
 "It is evident, especially after the most fundamental principles
 of Darwinism, that an organized being cannot be a descendant of
 another whose development is in an inverse order to his own. .
 . . Consequently, in accordance with these principles <i>man cannot
 be considered as the descendant of any simian type whatever.</i>"*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Lucae's argument <i>versus </i>the Ape-theory, based on the different
 flexures of the bones constituting the axis of the skull in the
 cases of Man and the Anthropoids, is fairly discussed by Schmidt
 ("<i>Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,</i>"<i> </i>p.
 290). He admits that "<i>the ape as he grows becomes more
 bestial</i>;<i> man </i>. . . <i>more human,</i>"<i> </i>and
 seems, indeed, to hesitate a moment before he passes on: <i>e.g</i>.,
 "This flexure of the cranial axis may, therefore, still be
 emphasized as a human character, in contradistinction to the apes;
 the peculiar characteristic of an order can <i>scarcely </i>be
 elicited from it; and especially as to the doctrine of descent,
 this circumstance <i>seems </i>in no way decisive." The writer
 evidently is not a little disquieted at the argument. He assures
 us that it upsets any possibility of the present apes having been
 the progenitors of mankind. But does it not also negative the
 bare possibility of the man and anthropoid having had a common
 -- though, so far, an absolutely theoretical -- ancestor.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<i>The Human Species</i>," p. 111, by de Quatrefages.
 The respective developments of the human and Simian brains are
 referred to. "In the ape the temporo-spheroidal convolutions,
 which form the middle lobe, make their appearance and are completed
 before the anterior convolutions which form the frontal lobe.
 In man, the frontal convolutions are, on the contrary, the first
 to appear, and those of the middle lobe are formed later."
 (<i>Ibid.</i>)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 647 THE FALLACIES OF MODERN SCIENTISTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Even "Natural Selection" itself is with every day more
 threatened. The deserters from the Darwinian camp are many, and
 those who were at one time its most ardent disciples are, owing
 to new discoveries, slowly but steadily preparing to turn over
 a new leaf. In the "Journal of the Royal Microscopical Society"
 for October, 1886, one can read as follows: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "<b>P</b>HYSIOLOGICAL <b>S</b>ELECTION. -- Mr. G. J. Romanes
 finds certain difficulties in regarding natural selection as a
 theory for the origin of adaptive structures. He proposes to replace
 it by what he calls physiological selection, or the segregation
 of the fit. His view is based on the extreme sensitiveness of
 the reproductive system to small changes in the conditions of
 life, and he thinks that variations in the direction of greater
 or less sterility must frequently occur in wild species. If the
 variation be such that the reproductive system, while showing
 some degree of sterility with the parent form, continues to be
 fertile within the limits of the varietal form, the variation
 would neither be swamped by intercrossing nor die out on account
 of sterility. When a variation of this kind occurs, the physiological
 barrier must divide the species into two parts. . . . . The author,
 in fine, regards mutual sterility, not as one of the effects of
 specific differentiation, but as the cause of it."*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 An attempt is made to show the above to be a complement of, and
 sequence to, the Darwinian theory. This is a <i>clumsy </i>attempt
 at best. The public will soon be made to believe that Mr. C. Dixon's
 "<i>Evolution without Natural Selection</i>"<i> </i>is
 also Darwinism -- expanded, as the author certainly claims it
 to be!
 </p><p>
 But it is like splitting the body of a man into three pieces or
 various portions of man, and then maintaining that each portion
 is the identical man as he was before; only -- expanded. Yet the
 author states on p. 79: -- "Let it be clearly understood
 that not one single syllable in the foregoing pages has been written
 antagonistic to Darwin's theory of Natural Selection. All I have
 done is to explain certain phenomena . . . . the more one studies
 Darwin's works, the more one is convinced of the truth of his
 hypothesis." (!!)
 </p><p>
 And before this, on p. 48, he alludes to: -- "the overwhelming
 array of facts which Darwin gave in support of his hypothesis,
 and which triumphantly carried the theory of Natural Selection
 over all obstacles and objections."
 </p><p>
 This does not prevent the learned author, however, from upsetting
 this theory as "triumphantly," and from even openly
 calling his work
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * To this an editorial remark adds that an "<strong>F.J.B.</strong>,"
 in the <i>Athenaeum -- </i>(No. 3069, Aug. 21, 1886, pp. 242-3)
 points out that naturalists have long recognised that there are
 "morphological" and "physiological" species.
 The former have their origin in men's minds, the latter in a series
 of changes sufficient to affect the internal as well as the external
 organs of a group of allied individuals. The "physiological
 selection" of morphological species is a confusion of ideas;
 that of physiological species "a redundancy of terms."
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 648 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "Evolution <i>without </i>a Natural Selection," or,
 in so many words, with Darwin's fundamental idea knocked to atoms
 in it.
 </p><p>
 As to Natural Selection itself, the utmost misconception prevails
 among many present-day thinkers who tacitly accept the conclusions
 of Darwinism. It is, for instance, a mere device of rhetoric to
 credit "Natural Selection" with the power of <i>originating
 </i>species. "Natural Selection" is no Entity; but a
 convenient phrase for describing the mode in which the survival
 of the fit and the elimination of the unfit among organisms is
 brought about in the struggle for existence. Every group of organisms
 tends to multiply beyond the means of subsistence, the constant
 battle for life -- the "struggle to obtain enough to eat
 and to escape being eaten" added to the environmental conditions
 -- necessitating a perpetual weeding out of the unfit. The <i>elite
 </i>of any stock thus sorted out, propagate the species and transmit
 their organic characteristics to their descendants. All useful
 variations are thus perpetuated, and a progressive improvement
 is effected. But Natural Selection, in the writer's humble opinion,
 "Selection, <i>as a Power,</i>"<i> </i>is in reality
 a pure myth; especially when resorted to as an explanation of
 the origin of species. It is merely a representative term expressive
 of the manner in which "useful variations" are stereotyped
 when produced. Of itself, "it" <i>can produce nothing,
 </i>and only operates on the rough material presented to "it."
 The real question at issue is: what <strong>C</strong>AUSE --
 combined with other secondary causes -- produces the "variations"
 in the organisms themselves. Many of these secondary causes are
 purely physical, climatic, dietary, etc., etc. Very well. But
 beyond the secondary aspects of organic evolution, a deeper principle
 has to be sought for. The materialist's "spontaneous variations,"
 and "<i>accidental </i>divergencies" are self-contradictory
 terms in a universe of "Matter, Force and <strong>N</strong>ECESSITY."
 Mere variability of type, apart from the supervisory presence
 of a quasi-intelligent impulse, is powerless to account for the
 stupendous complexities and marvels of the human body for instance.
 The insufficiency of the Darwinists' mechanical theory has been
 exposed at length by Dr. Von Hartmann among other purely negative
 thinkers. It is an abuse of the reader's intelligence to write,
 as does Haeckel, of <i>blind</i> indifferent cells, "arranging
 themselves into organs." The esoteric solution of the origin
 of animal species is given elsewhere.
 </p><p>
 Those purely <i>secondary </i>causes of differentiation, grouped
 under the head of sexual selection, natural selection, climate,
 isolation, etc., etc., mislead the Western Evolutionist and offer
 no real explanation whatever of the "whence" of the
 "ancestral types" which served as the<i> starting point
 </i>for physical development. The truth is that the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 649 THE OCCULT AND THE MODERN DOCTRINES.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 differentiating "causes" known to modern science only
 come into operation after the <i>physicalization of the primeval
 animal root-types out of the astral. </i>Darwinism only meets
 Evolution at its midway point -- that is to say when astral evolution
 has given place to the play of the ordinary physical forces with
 which our present senses acquaint us. But even here the Darwinian
 Theory, even with the "expansions" recently attempted,
 is inadequate to meet the facts of the case. The underlying physiological
 variation in species -- one to which all other laws are subordinate
 and secondary -- is a sub-conscious intelligence pervading matter,
 ultimately traceable to a REFLECTION of the Divine and Dhyan-Chohanic
 wisdom.* A not altogether dissimilar conclusion has been arrived
 at by so well known a thinker as Ed. von Hartmann, who, despairing
 of the efficacy of <i>unaided </i>Natural Selection, regards evolution
 as intelligently guided by the <strong>U</strong>NCONSCIOUS (the
 Cosmic <i>Logos </i>of Occultism). But the latter acts only mediately
 through <strong>F</strong>OHAT, or Dhyan-Chohanic energy, and
 not quite in the direct manner which the great pessimist describes.
 </p><p>
 It is this divergence among men of Science, their mutual, and
 often their <i>self</i>-contradictions, that gave the writer of
 the present volumes the courage to bring to light other and older
 teachings -- if only as hypotheses for <i>future </i>scientific
 appreciation. Though not in any way very learned in modern sciences,
 so evident, even to the humble recorder of this archaic clearing,
 are the said scientific fallacies and gaps, that she determined
 to touch upon all these, in order to place the two teachings on
 parallel lines. For Occultism, it is a question of self-defence,
 and nothing more.
 </p><p>
 So far, the "Secret Doctrine" has concerned itself with
 metaphysics, pure and simple. It has now landed on Earth, and
 finds itself within the domain of physical science and practical
 anthropology, or those branches of study which materialistic Naturalists
 claim as their rightful domain, coolly asserting, furthermore,
 that the higher and more perfect the working of the Soul, the
 more amenable it is to the analysis and explanations <i>of the
 zoologist and the physiologist alone.</i> (<i>Haeckel on </i>"<i>Cell-Souls
 and Soul-Cells.</i>") This stupendous pretension comes from
 one, who, to prove his pithecoid descent, has not hesitated to
 include among the ancestors of man the <i>Lemuridae</i>;<i> </i>which
 have been promoted by him to the rank of <i>Prosimiae, indeciduate
 mammals, </i>to which he very incorrectly attributes a <i>decidua</i>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The<i> </i>"<i>principle of perfectibility</i>"<i>
 </i>of Nageli; von de Baer's "<i>striving towards the purpose</i>";<i>
 </i>Braun's "<i>Divine breath </i>as the inward impulse in
 the evolutionary history of Nature"; Professor Owen's "<i>tendency
 to perfectibility, </i>etc.," are all veiled manifestations
 of the universal guiding <strong>F</strong>OHAT, rich with the
 Divine and Dhyan-Chohanic thought.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 650 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and a discoidal placenta.* For this Haeckel was taken severely
 to task by de Quatrefages, and criticised by his own brother materialists
 and agnostics, as great, if not greater, authorities than himself,
 namely, by Virchow and du Bois-Reymond.**
 </p><p>
 Such opposition notwithstanding, Haeckel's wild theories are,
 to this day, called scientific and logical by some. The mysterious
 nature of Consciousness, of Soul, Spirit in Man being now explained
 as a mere advance on the functions of the protoplasmic molecules
 of the lively <i>Protista, </i>and the gradual evolution and growth
 of human mind and "social instincts" toward civilization
 having to be traced back to their origin in the civilization of
 ants, bees, and other creatures, the chances left for an impartial
 hearing of the doctrines of archaic Wisdom, are few indeed. The
 <i>educated </i>profane is told that "the social instincts
 of the lower animals have, of late, been regarded <i>as being
 clearly the origin of morals, </i>even of those of man" (!)
 and that our divine consciousness, our soul, intellect, and aspirations
 have "worked their way up from the lower stages of the simple
 cell-soul" of the gelatinous Bathybius -- (<i>See Haeckel</i>'<i>s
 </i>"<i>Present Position of Evolution</i>"<i> Notes</i>)<i>,
 -- </i>and he seems to believe it. For such men, the metaphysics
 of Occultism must produce the effect that our grandest orchestral
 and vocal oratorios produce on the Chinaman: a sound that jars
 upon their nerves.
 </p><p>
 Yet, are our esoteric teachings about "angels," the
 first three <i>pre</i>-animal human Races, and the downfall of
 the Fourth, <i>on a lower level of fiction and self-delusion </i>than
 the Haeckelian "plastidular," or the inorganic "molecular
 Souls of the <i>Protista</i>"?<i> </i>Between the evolution
 of the spiritual nature of man from the above Amoebian Souls,
 and the alleged development of his physical frame from the protoplastic
 dweller in the Ocean slime, there is an abyss which will not be
 easily crossed by any man in the <i>full</i> possession of his
 intellectual faculties. Physical evolution, as modern Science
 teaches it, is a subject for open controversy; spiritual and moral
 development on the same lines is the insane dream of a crass materialism.
 </p><p>
 Furthermore, past as well as present daily experience teaches
 that no truth has ever been accepted by the learned bodies unless
 it dovetailed
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <i>Vide infra, </i>M. de Quatrefages' <i>expose</i> of Haeckel,
 in § ii., "The Ancestors Mankind is offered by Science."
 </p><p>
 ** Strictly speaking du Bois-Reymond is an <i>agnostic, </i>and
 not a materialist. He has protested most vehemently against the
 materialistic doctrine, which affirms mental phenomena to be merely
 the product of molecular motion. The most accurate <i>physiological
 </i>knowledge of the structure of the brain leaves us "nothing
 but matter in motion," he asserts; "<i>we must go further,
 </i>and admit the utterly incomprehensible nature of the psychical
 principle which it is <i>impossible to regard </i>as a mere outcome
 of material causes."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 651 AN EXCHANGE OF MUTUAL COMPLIMENTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 with the habitual preconceived ideas of their professors. "The
 crown of the innovator is a crown of thorns": -- said G.
 St. Hilaire. It is only that which fits in with popular hobbies
 and accepted notions that as a general rule gains ground. Hence
 the triumph of the Haeckelian ideas, notwithstanding their being
 proclaimed by Virchow, du Bois-Reymond, and others as the "<i>testimonium
 paupertatis </i>of natural Science."
 </p><p>
 Diametrically opposed as may be the materialism of the German
 Evolutionists to the spiritual conceptions of Esoteric philosophy,
 radically inconsistent as is their accepted anthropological system
 with the real facts of nature, -- the pseudo-idealistic bias now
 colouring English thought is almost more pernicious. The pure
 materialistic doctrine admits of a direct refutation and appeal
 to the logic of facts. The idealism of the present day, not only
 contrives to absorb, on the one hand, the basic negations of Atheism,
 but lands its votaries in a tangle of <i>unreality, </i>which
 culminates in a practical Nihilism. Argument with such writers
 is almost out of the question. Idealists, therefore, will be still
 more antagonistic to the Occult teachings now given than even
 the Materialists. But as no worse fate can befall the exponents
 of Esoteric Anthropo-<i>Genesis</i> than being openly called by
 their foes by their old and time-honoured names of "lunatics"
 and "ignoramuses," the present archaic theories may
 be safely added to the many modern speculations, and bide their
 time for their full or even partial recognition. Only, as the
 existence itself of these "archaic theories" will probably
 be denied, we have to give our best proofs and stand by them to
 the bitter end.
 </p><p>
 In our race and generation the one "temple in the Universe"
 is in rare cases -- <i>within </i>us; but our body and mind have
 been too defiled by both Sin and Science to be outwardly <i>now</i>
 anything better than a fane of iniquity and error. And here our
 mutual position -- that of Occultism and Modern Science -- ought
 to be once for all defined.
 </p><p>
 We, Theosophists, would willingly bow before such men of learning
 as the late Prof. Balfour Stewart, Messrs. Crookes, Quatrefages,
 Wallace, Agassiz, Butlerof, and several others, though we may
 not agree, from the stand-point of esoteric philosophy, with all
 they say. But nothing could make us consent to even a show of
 respect for the opinions of other men of science, such as Haeckel,
 Carl Vogt, or Ludwig Buchner, in Germany; or even of Mr. Huxley
 and his co-thinkers in materialism in England -- the colossal
 erudition of the first named, notwithstanding. Such men are simply
 the intellectual and moral murderers of future generations; especially
 Haeckel, whose crass materialism often rises to the height of
 idiotic <i>naivetes </i>in his reasonings. One has but to read
 his "Pedigree of Man, and Other Essays" (<i>Aveling</i>'<i>s
 transl.</i>)<i> </i>to feel a desire, in the words of Job, that
 his</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 652 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 remembrance should perish from the earth, and that he "shall
 have no name in the streets." Hear him deriding the idea
 of the origin of the human race "as a supernatural (?) phenomenon,"
 as one "that could not result from <i>simple mechanical causes,
 </i>from<i> physical and chemical forces, </i>but requires the
 direct intervention of a creative personality. . . "
 </p><p>
 . . . . "Now the central point of Darwin's teaching,"
 . . goes on the creator of the mythical <i>Sozura, </i>"lies
 in this, that it demonstrates the simplest mechanical causes,
 purely physico-chemical phenomena of nature, as wholly sufficient
 to explain the highest and most difficult problems. Darwin puts
 in the place of <i>a conscious creative force, </i>building and
 arranging the organic bodies of animals and plants on a designed
 plan, <i>a series of natural forces working blindly </i>(<i>or
 we say</i>)<i> without aim, without design. </i>In place of an
 arbitrary act of operation, we have a necessary law of Evolution
 . . . . " (So had Manu and Kapila, and, at the same time,
 guiding, conscious and intelligent Powers). . . "Darwin had
 very wisely . . . put on one side the question as to the first
 appearance of life. But very soon that consequence, so full of
 meaning, so wide reaching, was openly discussed by able and brave
 scientific men, such as Huxley, Carl Vogt, Ludwig Buchner. <i>A
 mechanical origin of the earliest living form, </i>was held as
 the necessary sequence to Darwin's teaching . . and we are at
 present concerned with a single consequence of the theory, <i>the
 natural </i>origin of the human race through ALMIGHTY EVOLUTION"
 (pp. 34, 37).
 </p><p>
 To which, unabashed by this scientific farrago, Occultism replies:
 in the course of Evolution, when the physical triumphed over,
 and nearly crushed under its weight, spiritual and mental evolutions,
 the great gift of<i> Kriyasakti* </i>remained the heirloom of
 only a few elect men in every age . . . . Spirit strove vainly
 to <i>manifest itself in its fulness in purely organic forms </i>(as
 has been explained in Part I. of this Volume), and the faculty,
 which had been a natural attribute in the early humanity of the
 Third Race, became one of the class regarded as simply phenomenal
 by the Spiritualists and Occultists, and as <i>scientifically
 impossible </i>by the materialists.
 </p><p>
 In our modern day the mere assertion that there exists a power
 which can create human forms -- ready-made <i>sheaths </i>for
 the "<i>conscious </i>monads" or Nirmanakayas of past
 Manvantaras to incarnate within -- is, of course, absurd, ridiculous!
 That which is regarded as quite natural, on the other hand, is
 the production of a Frankenstein's monster, <i>plus </i>moral
 consciousness, religious aspirations, genius, and a feeling of
 one's own immortal nature within one's self -- by "physico-chemical
 forces, guided by blind Almighty Evolution" ("Pedigree
 of Man").
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * For explanation of the term <i>Kriyasakti, </i>see Com. 2 in
 Stanza 26.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 653 SCIENCE IS SILENT ON EVERY PROBLEM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 As to the origin of that man, not <i>ex-nihilo, </i>cemented by
 a little red clay, but from a living divine Entity consolidating
 the astral body with surrounding materials -- this conception
 is too absurd even to be mentioned in the opinion of the materialists.
 Nevertheless, Occultists and Theosophists are ready to have their
 claims and theories -- however unscientific and superstitious
 at first glance -- compared as to their intrinsic value and probability,
 with those of the modern evolutionists. Hence the esoteric teaching
 is absolutely opposed to the Darwinian evolution, as <i>applied
 to man, and partially </i>so with regard to other species.
 </p><p>
 It would be interesting to obtain a glimpse of the mental representation
 of <i>Evolution </i>in the Scientific brain of a materialist.
 What <i>is</i><strong> E</strong>VOLUTION? If asked to define
 the full and <i>complete </i>meaning of the term, neither Huxley
 nor Haeckel will be able to do it any better than Webster does:
 "the act of unfolding; the process of growth, development;
 as the evolution of a flower from a bud, or an animal from the
 egg." Yet the bud must be traced through its parent-plant
 to the seed, and the egg to the animal or bird that laid it; or
 at any rate to the speck of protoplasm from which it expanded
 and grew. And both the <i>seed </i>and the <i>speck </i>must have
 the latent potentialities in them for the reproduction and gradual
 development, the unfolding of the thousand and one forms or phases
 of evolution, through which they must pass before the flower or
 the animal are fully developed? Hence, the future plan, if not
 a DESIGN, <i>must be there. </i>Moreover, that <i>seed has to
 be traced, </i>and its nature ascertained. Have the Darwinists
 been successful in this? Or will the Moneron be cast in our teeth?
 But this atom of the Watery Abysses is <i>not</i> homogeneous
 matter; and there must be something or somebody that had moulded
 and cast it into being.
 </p><p>
 Here Science is once more silent. But since there is no Self-consciousness
 as yet in either speck, seed, or germ, according to both Materialists
 and Psychologists of the modern school -- Occultists agreeing
 in this for once with their natural enemies -- what is it that
 guides the force or forces so unerringly in this process of evolution?
 <i>Blind </i>force? As well call <i>blind </i>the brain which
 evolved in Haeckel his "Pedigree of Man" and other lucubrations.
 We can easily conceive that the said brain lacks an important
 centre or two. For, whoever knows anything of the anatomy of the
 human, or even of any animal, body, and is still an <i>atheist
 </i>and a <i>materialist, </i>must be "hopelessly insane,"
 according to Lord Herbert, who rightly sees in the frame of man's
 body and the coherence of its parts, something so strange and
 paradoxical that he holds it "to be the greatest miracle
 of nature." <i>Blind</i> forces, "and <i>no</i> design"
 in anything under the Sun; when no <i>sane </i>man of Science
 would hesitate to say that, even from the little he knows and
 has hitherto discovered of the forces at work in Kosmos, he sees
 very plainly</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 654 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 that every part, every speck and atom are in harmony with their
 fellow atoms, and these with the whole, each having its distinct
 mission throughout the life-cycle. But, fortunately, the greatest,
 the most eminent thinkers and Scientists of the day are now beginning
 to rise against this "Pedigree," and even Darwin's <i>natural
 selection </i>theory, though its author had never, probably, contemplated
 such widely stretched conclusions. The remarkable work of the
 Russian Scientist N. T. Danilevsky -- "Darwinism, a Critical
 Investigation of the Theory" -- upsets it completely and
 without appeal, and so does de Quatrefages in his last work. Our
 readers are recommended to examine the learned paper by Dr. Bourges
 -- read by its author, a member of the Paris Anthropological Society
 at a recent official meeting of the latter -- called "<i>Evolutionary
 Psychology</i>;<i> the Evolution of Spirit, etc.</i>"<i>
 </i>in which he reconciles entirely the two teachings -- namely,
 those of the physical and spiritual evolutions. He explains the
 origin of the variety of organic forms, made to fit their environments
 with such evident intelligent design, by the existence and the
 mutual help and <i>interaction </i>of two principles in (manifest)
 nature, the inner Conscious Principle adapting itself to physical
 nature and the innate potentialities in the latter. Thus the French
 Scientist has to return to our old friend -- <i>Archaeus, </i>or
 the life-Principle -- without naming it, as Dr. Richardson has
 done in England in his "Nerve-Force," etc. The same
 idea was recently developed in Germany by Baron Hellenbach, in
 his remarkable work, "Individuality in the light of Biology
 and modern Philosophy."
 </p><p>
 We find the same conclusions arrived at in still another excellent
 volume of another Russian deep thinker, N. N<i>. </i>Strachof
 -- who says in his "Fundamental Conceptions of Psychology
 and Physiology": -- "The most clear, as the most familiar,
 type of development may be found in our own mental or physical
 evolution, which has served others as a model to follow . . .
 . If organisms are <i>entities</i> .<i> </i>. . then it is only
 just to conclude and assert that the organic life strives to beget
 psychic life; but it would be still more correct and in accordance
 with the spirit of these two categories of evolution to say, that
 <i>the true cause of organic life is the tendency of spirit to
 manifest in substantial forms, to clothe itself in substantial
 reality. It is the highest form which contains the complete explanation
 of the lowest, never the reverse.</i>"<i> </i>This is admitting,
 as Bourges does in the <i>Memoire </i>above quoted, the identity
 of this mysterious, integrally acting and organizing Principle
 with the Self-Conscious and Inner Subject, which we call the <strong>E</strong>GO
 and the world at large -- the Soul. Thus, gradually, all the best
 Scientists and Thinkers are approaching the Occultists in their
 general conclusions.
 </p><p>
 But such metaphysically inclined men of Science are out of court
 and will hardly be listened to. Schiller, in his magnificent poem
 on</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 655 THE ONE UNPARDONABLE SIN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Veil of Isis, makes the mortal youth who dared to lift the
 impenetrable covering fall down dead after beholding naked Truth
 in the face of the stern goddess. Have some of our Darwinians,
 so tenderly united in natural selection and affinity, also gazed
 at the Saitic Mother bereft of her veils? One might almost suspect
 it after reading their theories. Their great intellects must have
 collapsed while gauging too closely the uncovered face of Nature,
 leaving only the grey matter and ganglia in their brain, to respond
 to <i>blind</i> physico-chemical forces. At any rate Shakespeare's
 lines apply admirably to our modem Evolutionist who symbolizes
 that "proud man," who --
 </p><blockquote>
 "<i>Dress</i>'<i>d in a little brief authority</i>;<br>
 <i>Most ignorant of what he</i>'<i>s most assured,<br>
 </i>His glassy essence -- like an angry ape,<br>
 Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,<br>
 As make the Angels weep! . . . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 These have nought to do with the "angels." Their only
 concern is the human ancestor, the pithecoid Noah who gave birth
 to three sons -- the tailed Cynocephalus, the tailless Ape, and
 the "arboreal" Palaeolithic man. On this point, they
 will not be contradicted. Every doubt expressed is immediately
 set down as an attempt to cripple scientific inquiry. The insuperable
 difficulty at the very foundation of the evolution theory, namely,
 that no Darwinian is able to give even an approximate definition
 of the period <i>at </i>which, and the form <i>in</i> which, the
 first man appeared, is smoothed down to a trifling impediment,
 which is "really of no account." Every branch of knowledge
 is in the same predicament, we are informed. The chemist bases
 his most abstruse calculations simply "upon a hypothesis
 of atoms and molecules, of which not one has ever been seen isolated,
 weighed, or defined. The electrician speaks of magnetic fluids
 which have never tangibly revealed themselves. No definite origin
 can be assigned either to molecules or magnetism. Science cannot
 and does not pretend to any knowledge of the beginnings of law,
 matter or life, . . ." etc., etc. (<i>Knowledge, </i>January,
 1882.)
 </p><p>
 And, withal, to reject a <i>scientific hypothesis, </i>however
 absurd, is to commit the one unpardonable sin! We risk it.
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-3-02.htm">Next Section</a>
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>