<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page 447]] </h6>
 
 <h4>BOOK II., PART II.</h4>
 
 <h3>THE</h3>
 
 <h3>ARCHAIC SYMBOLISM OF THE</h3>
 
 <h3>WORLD-RELIGIONS.</h3>
 
 <p>
 ---------
 </p><blockquote>
 "The narratives of the Doctrine are its cloak. The simple
 look only at the garment -- that is, upon the narrative of the
 Doctrine; more they know not. The instructed, however, see not
 merely the cloak, but what the cloak covers.<br>
 (The <strong><i>Z</i></strong><em>OHAR</em><i>,</i> iii., 152;
 Franck, 119.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "<strong>T</strong>HE <strong>M</strong>YSTERIES OF THE <strong>F</strong>AITH
 (are) NOT TO BE DIVULGED TO ALL. . . . . It is requisite to hide
 in a mystery the wisdom spoken." <br>
 (<em>Clem. Alex., </em>"Strom." 12.) 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page 448]] </h6>
 
 <h4>CONTENTS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 --------
 </p><p>
 ยง <strong>E</strong>SOTERIC <strong>T</strong>ENETS <strong>C</strong>ORROBORATED
 IN EVERY <strong>S</strong>CRIPTURE ... 449
 </p><p>
 ------
 </p><p>
 XVI. <strong>A</strong>DAM-<strong>A</strong>DAMI ... 452
 </p><p>
 ------
 </p><p>
 XVII. <strong>T</strong>HE "<strong>H</strong>OLY OF <strong>H</strong>OLIES"
 -- <strong>I</strong>TS <strong>D</strong>EGRADATION ... 459
 </p><p>
 ------
 </p><p>
 XVIII. <strong>O</strong>N THE <strong>M</strong>YTH OF THE "<strong>F</strong>ALLEN
 <strong>A</strong>NGEL," IN ITS <strong>V</strong>ARIOUS
 <strong>P</strong>HASES ... 475
 </p><blockquote>
 The Evil Spirit: Who and What? ... 475
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The Gods of Light proceed from the Gods of Darkness ... 483
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The Many Meanings of the "War in Heaven" ... 492
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 XIX. <strong>I</strong>S <strong>P</strong>LEROMA <strong>S</strong>ATAN'S
 <strong>L</strong>AIR? ... 506
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 XX. <strong>P</strong>ROMETHEUS, THE <strong>T</strong>ITAN ...
 519
 </p><blockquote>
 His Origin in Ancient India ... 519
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 XXI. ENOICHION ... 529
 </p><p>
 ------
 </p><p>
 XXII. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>S</strong>YMBOLISM OF THE <strong>M</strong>YSTERY-<strong>N</strong>AMES
 <strong>I</strong>AO AND <strong>J</strong>EHOVAH, WITH THEIR
 <strong>R</strong>ELATION TO THE <strong>C</strong>ROSS AND <strong>C</strong>IRCLE
 ... 536
 </p><blockquote>
 Cross and Circle ... 545
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The Fall of the Cross into Matter ... 553
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 ------
 </p><p>
 XXIII. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>U</strong>PANISHADS IN <strong>G</strong>NOSTIC
 <strong>L</strong>ITERATURE ... 563
 </p><p>
 ------
 </p><p>
 XXIV. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>C</strong>ROSS AND THE <strong>P</strong>YTHAGOREAN
 <strong>D</strong>ECADE ... 573
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 XXV. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>M</strong>YSTERIES OF THE <strong>H</strong>EBDOMAD
 ... 590
 </p><blockquote>
 Saptaparna ... 590
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The Tetraktis in relation to the Heptagon ... 598
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The Septenary Element in the Vedas. It corroborates the Occult
 Teaching concerning the Seven Globes and the Seven Races ... 605
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The Septenary in the Exoteric Works ... 611
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 Seven in Astronomy, Science and Magic ... 618
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The Seven Souls of the Egyptologists ... 630 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page 449]] </h6>
 
 <h3>BOOK II. -- PART II.</h3>
 
 <p>
 --------
 </p><h4>ESOTERIC TENETS CORROBORATED IN EVERY<br>
 SCRIPTURE.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>I</strong>N view of the strangeness of the teachings,
 and of many a doctrine which from the modern scientific stand-point
 must seem absurd, some necessary and additional explanations have
 to be made. The theories contained in the Second Part of the Stanzas
 are even more difficult to assimilate than those which are embodied
 in Vol. 1, on Cosmogony. Theology, therefore, has to be questioned
 here, as Science will be in the <em>Addenda </em>(Part <strong>III</strong>.).
 Since our doctrines differ so widely from the current ideas of
 both Materialism and Theology, the Occultists must be ever prepared
 to repel the attacks of either or of both.
 </p><p>
 The reader can never be too often reminded that, as the abundant
 quotations from various old Scriptures prove, these teachings
 are as old as the world; and that the present work is a simple
 attempt to render, in modern language and in a phraseology with
 which the scientific and educated student is familiar, archaic
 Genesis and History as taught in certain Asiatic centres of esoteric
 learning. They must be accepted or rejected on their own merits,
 fully or partially; but not before they have been carefully compared
 with the corresponding theological dogmas and the modern scientific
 theories and speculations.
 </p><p>
 One feels a serious doubt whether, with all its intellectual acuteness,
 our age is destined to discover in each western nation even one
 solitary <em>uninitiated </em>scholar or philosopher capable of
 fully comprehending the spirit of archaic philosophy. Nor can
 one be expected to do so, before the real meaning of these terms,
 the Alpha and the <em>Omega </em>of Eastern esotericism, the words
 <em>Sat</em> and <em>Asat, -- </em>so<em> </em>freely used in
 the Rig-Veda, and elsewhere -- is thoroughly assimilated. Without
 this key to the Aryan Wisdom, the Cosmogony of the Rishis and
 the Arhats is in danger of remaining a dead letter to the average
 Orientalist. <em>Asat is</em><i> </i>not merely the negation of
 <em>Sat, </em>nor is it the "not yet existing"; for
 <em>Sat</em> is in itself neither the "existent," nor
 "being." <strong>S</strong>AT is the immutable, the
 ever present, changeless and eternal root, from and through which
 all proceeds. But it is far more than the potential force in the
 seed, which propels onward the process of development, or what
 is now called evolution. It is the ever becoming, though the never
 manifesting.* <em>Sat</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Hegelian doctrine, which identifies <em>Absolute Being </em>or
 "Be-ness" with "non-Being," and represents
 the Universe as an <em>eternal becoming, </em>is identical with
 the Vedanta philosophy. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 450 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is born from <em>Asat</em>, and <strong>A</strong>SAT is begotten
 by <em>Sat: </em>the perpetual motion in a circle, truly; yet
 a circle that can be squared only at the supreme Initiation, at
 the threshold of Paranirvana.
 </p><p>
 Barth started a reflection on the <em>Rig-Veda </em>which was
 meant for a stern criticism, an unusual, therefore, as was thought,
 an original view of this archaic volume. It so happened, however,
 that, while criticising, that scholar revealed a truth, without
 being himself aware of its full importance. He premises by saying
 that "neither in the language nor in the thought of the Rig-Veda"
 has he "been able to discover that quality <em>of primitive
 natural simplicity, </em>which so many are fain to see in it."
 Barth had Max Muller in his mind's eye when writing this. For
 the famous Oxford professor has throughout characterised the hymns
 of the Rig Veda, as the unsophisticated expression of the religious
 feeling of a pastoral innocent people. "In the Vedic hymns
 the ideas and myths appear in their simplest and freshest form;"
 -- the Sanskrit scholar thinks. Barth is of a different opinion,
 however.
 </p><p>
 So divided and personal are the opinions of Sanskritists as to
 the importance and intrinsic value of the Rig Veda, that those
 opinions become entirely biassed whichever way they incline. Thus
 Mr. Max Muller declares that: "Nowhere is the wide distance
 which separates the ancient poems of India from the most ancient
 literature of Greece more clearly felt, than when we compare the
 growing myths of the Veda with the full grown and decayed myths
 on which the poetry of Homer is founded. The Veda is the real
 Theogony of the <em>Aryan races,</em> while that of Hesiod is
 a distorted caricature of the original image." This is a
 sweeping assertion, and perhaps rather unjust in its general application.
 But why not try to account for it? Orientalists cannot do so,
 for they reject the chronology of the Secret Doctrine, and could
 hardly admit the fact that between the Rig-Vedic hymns and Hesiod's
 Theogony tens of thousands of years have elapsed. So they fail
 to see that the Greek myths are no longer the primitive symbolical
 language of the Initiates, the disciples of the gods-Hierophants,
 the divine ancient "sacrificers," and that disfigured
 by the distance, and encumbered by the exuberant growth of human
 <em>profane</em> fancy, they now stand like distorted images of
 stars in running waves. But if Hesiod's Cosmogony and Theogony
 are to be viewed as caricatures of the original images, how much
 more so the myths in the Hebrew <em>Genesis </em>in the sight
 of those, for whom they are no more divine revelation or the word
 of God, than Hesiod's Theogony is for Mr. Gladstone.
 </p><p>
 "The poetry it (the Rig Veda) contains appears to me, on
 the contrary," says Barth "to be of a singularly <em>refined</em>
 character and</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 451 THE VEDAS WRITTEN BY INITIATES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 artificially elaborated, <em>full of allusions and reticences,
 </em>of<em> pretensions</em> (?) to mysticism and theosophic insight,
 and the manner of its expression is such as reminds one more frequently
 of the phraseology in use <em>among</em> <em>certain small groups
 of initiated, </em>than the poetic language of a large community."
 ("<em>The Religions of India,</em>"<em> </em>p. xiii.)
 </p><p>
 We will not stop to enquire of the critic what he can know of
 the phraseology in use among the "initiated," or whether
 he belongs himself to such a group; for, in the latter case, he
 would hardly have used such language. But the above shows the
 remarkable disagreement between scholars even with regard to the
 <em>external</em> character of the Rig Veda. What, then, can any
 of the modern Sanskritists know about its <em>internal </em>or
 esoteric meaning, beyond the correct inference of Barth, that
 <em>this Scripture has been compiled by </em><strong>I</strong>NITIATES?
 </p><p>
 The whole of the present work is an endeavour to prove this truth.
 The ancient adepts have solved the great problems of science,
 however unwilling modern materialism may be to admit the fact.
 The mysteries of Life and Death <em>were</em> fathomed by the
 great master-minds of antiquity; and if they have preserved them
 in secresy and silence, it is because these problems formed part
 of the sacred mysteries; and, secondly, because they must have
 remained incomprehensible to the vast majority of men then, as
 they do now. If such teachings are still regarded as chimeras
 by our opponents in philosophy, it may be a consolation to the
 Theosophists to learn, on good proofs, that the speculations of
 modern psychologists -- whether serious Idealists, like Mr. Herbert
 Spencer, or wool-gathering pseudo-Idealists -- are far more chimerical.
 Indeed, instead of resting on the firm foundation of facts in
 Nature, they are the unhealthy will-o'-the-wisps of materialistic
 imagination, of the brains that evolved them -- and no more. While
 they deny, we affirm; and our affirmation is corroborated by almost
 all the sages of antiquity. Believing in Occultism and a host
 of invisible Potencies for good reasons, we say: <em>Certus sum,
 scio quod credidi; </em>to which our critics reply: <em>Credat
 Judaeus Apella. </em>Neither is converted by the other, nor does
 such result affect even our little planet. <em>E pur se muove!</em>
 
 </p><p>
 Nor is there any need of proselytizing. As remarked by the wise
 Cicero, "Time destroys the speculations of man, but it confirms
 the judgment of nature." Let us bide our time. Meanwhile,
 it is not in the human constitution to witness in silence the
 destruction of one's gods, whether they be true or false. And
 as theology and materialism have combined together to destroy
 the old gods of antiquity and seek to disfigure every old philosophical
 conception, it is but just that the lovers of old wisdom should
 defend their position, by proving that the whole arsenal of the
 two is, at best, formed of new weapons made out of very old material.
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-2-02.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>