<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 778 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h3>ยง VII.<br>
 SCIENTIFIC AND GEOLOGICAL PROOFS OF THE<br>
 EXISTENCE OF SEVERAL SUBMERGED CONTINENTS.</h3>
 
 <p>
 <b>I</b>T may not be amiss -- for the benefit of those who resolve
 the tradition of a lost Miocene Atlantis into an "antiquated
 myth," to append a few scientific admissions on this point.
 Science, it is true, is largely indifferent to such questions.
 But there are Scientists ready to admit that, in any case, a cautious
 agnosticism as to geological problems concerning the remote past
 is far more philosophical than <i>a priori </i>denial, or even
 hasty generalizations on insufficient data.
 </p><p>
 Meanwhile two very interesting instances, that have been lately
 met with, may be pointed out as "confirming" certain
 passages in the letter of a Master, published in "Esoteric
 Buddhism." The eminence of the authorities will not be questioned:
 --
 </p><p>
 [[First Column]]
 </p><p>
 Extract from p. 61 of "Esoteric Buddhism."
 </p><p>
 No. 1.
 </p><p>
 "The sinking of the Atlantis (the group of continents and
 islands) began during the Eocene period . . . . and it culminated
 in the Miocene, first in the <i>final disappearance of the largest,
 an event coincident with the elevation of the Alps, </i>and second
 in the sinking of the last of the fair islands mentioned by Plato."
 </p><p>
 [[First Column continued on next page]]
 </p><p>
 [[Second Column]]
 </p><p>
 Extract from a Lecture by W. Pengelly, <strong>F.R.S</strong>.,
 <strong>F.G.S</strong>.
 </p><p>
 No. 1.
 </p><p>
 "Was there, as some have believed, an Atlantis -- a continent
 or Archipelago of large islands occupying the area of the North
 Atlantic? There is, perhaps, nothing unphilosophical in the hypothesis.
 For since, as geologists state, '<i>The Alps have acquired 4,000
 and even in some places more than 10,000 feet of their present
 altitude since the commencement of the Eocene epoch</i>'<i> </i>(Lyell's
 Principles 2nd Ed. p. 256<i>.</i>)<i> </i>-- a<i> post-Miocene
 depression might have carried the hypothetical Atlantis into almost
 abysmal depths.</i>"<i>*</i> 
 </p><p>
 [[Second Column continued on next page]]
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Having already given several instances of the vagaries of Science,
 it is delightful to find such <i>agreement </i>in this particular
 case. Read in connection with the scientific admission (cited
 elsewhere) of the geologists' ignorance of even the approximate
 duration of periods, the following passage is highly instructive:
 "We are not yet able to assign an <i>approximate </i>date
 for the most recent epoch at which our Northern Hemisphere was
 covered with glaciers. According to Mr. Wallace, this epoch may
 have occurred <i>seventy thousand years </i>ago, while others
 would assign to it an antiquity of at least <i>two hundred thousand
 </i>years, and there are yet others who urge strong arguments
 on behalf of the opinion that a <i>million of years </i>is barely
 enough to have produced the changes which have taken place since
 that event." (Fiske, "<i>Cosmic</i> [[Footnote continued
 on next page]]</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 779 GEOLOGY CORROBORATES OCCULTISM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 [[First Column continued from previous page]]
 </p><p>
 No. 2.
 </p><p>
 "Lemuria cannot any more be confounded with the Atlantis
 continent than Europe with America. Both sank and were drowned
 with all their 'gods'; yet, between the two catastrophes a short
 period of about some 700,000 years elapsed; Lemuria flourishing
 and ending her career just about that trifling lapse of time before
 the early <i>Eocene </i>Age, since its Race was the Third. Behold
 <i>the relics of that once great race in some of the flat-headed
 aborigines of your </i><b>A</b>USTRALIA." ("Esoteric
 Buddhism," p. 55<i>.</i>)
 </p><p>
 [[Second Column continued from previous page]]
 </p><p>
 No. 2.
 </p><p>
 "It would be premature to say, because no evidence has yet
 been adduced, <i>that men may not have existed in the Eocene Age,
 </i>especially as it can be shown that <i>a race of men, the lowest
 we know of, co-exists with that remnant of the Eocene flora which
 still survives on the continent and islands of Australia.</i>"<i>
 </i>(Extract from an article in "Popular Science Review,"
 Vol. V. p. 18, by Professor Seemann, Ph.D., <strong>F.L.S</strong>.,
 <strong>P.A.S</strong>.).
 </p><p>
 Haeckel, who fully accepts the reality of a former Lemuria, also
 regards the <i>Australians as direct descendants of the Lemurians.
 </i>"Persistent forms (of both his Lemurian stems,) are in
 all probability still surviving . . . Papuans and Hottentots .
 . . <i>Australians </i>. . . one division of the Malays."
 </p><p>
 [[End of Columns]]
 </p><p>
 With regard to a former civilization, of which a <i>portion </i>of
 these degraded Australians are the last surviving offshoot, the
 opinion of Gerland is strongly suggestive. Commenting upon the
 religion and mythology of the tribes, he writes, "The statement
 that the Australian civilization (?) indicates a <i>higher grade,
 </i>is nowhere more clearly proved than here, where <i>everything
 resounds like the expiring voices of a previous and richer age.
 </i>The idea that the Australians have no religion or mythology
 is thoroughly false. But this religion is certainly <i>quite deteriorated.</i>"<i>
 </i>(Cited in Schmidt's "<i>Doctrine of Descent of Darwinism,</i>"<i>
 </i>pp.<i> </i>301-2.) As to his other statement, namely, that
 the Australians are a "division of the Malays" (<i>Vide
 </i>his ethnological theories in the "<i>Pedigree of Man</i>")<i>,
 </i>Haeckel is in error, if he classes the Australians with the
 rest. The Malays and Papuans are a <i>mixed </i>stock, resulting
 from the intermarriages of the low Atlantean sub-races with the
 Seventh sub-race of the Third Root-Race. Like the Hottentots,
 they are of indirect <i>Lemuro-Atlantean </i>descent. It is a
 most suggestive fact -- to those concrete thinkers who demand
 a <i>physical </i>proof of Karma -- that the lowest races of men
 are now rapidly dying out; a phenomenon largely due to an extraordinary
 sterility setting in among the women, from the time that they
 were first approached by the Europeans. A process of decimation
 is taking
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]]<i> Philosophy,</i>"<i>
 Vol. </i>II., p. 304). Prof. Lefevre, again, gives us as <i>his
 </i>estimate 100,000 years. Clearly, then, if modern Science is
 unable to estimate the date of so comparatively recent an era
 as the Glacial Epoch, it can hardly impeach the Esoteric Chronology
 of Race-Periods and Geological Ages.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 780 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 place all over the globe, among those races, whose "time
 is up" -- among just those stocks, be it remarked, which
 esoteric philosophy regards as the senile representatives of lost
 archaic nations. It is inaccurate to maintain that the extinction
 of a lower race is <i>invariably </i>due to cruelties or abuses
 perpetrated by colonists. Change of diet, drunkenness, etc., etc.,
 have done much; but those who rely on such data as offering an
 all-sufficient explanation of the crux, cannot meet the phalanx
 of facts now so closely arrayed. "Nothing," says even
 the materialist Lefevre, "can save <i>those that have run
 their course</i>. . . . It would be necessary to extend their
 <i>destined cycle</i>. . . . <i>The peoples that have been most
 spared </i>. . . <i>Hawaiians or Maories, have been no less decimated
 than the tribes massacred or tainted by European intrusion.</i>"<i>
 </i>("<i>Philosophy,</i>"<i> </i>p. 508.)
 </p><p>
 True; but is not the phenomenon here confirmed of the operation
 of <b>C</b>YCLIC <b>L</b>AW difficult to account for on materialist
 lines? Whence the "destined cycle" and the order here
 testified to? Why does this (Karmic) sterility attack and root
 out certain races at their "appointed hour"? The answer
 that it is due to a "mental disproportion" between the
 colonizing and aboriginal races is obviously evasive, since it
 does not explain the sudden "<i>checks to fertility</i>"<i>
 </i>which so frequently supervene. The dying out of the Hawaiians,
 for instance, is one of the most mysterious problems of the day.
 Ethnology will sooner or later have to recognize with Occultists
 that the true solution has to be sought for in a comprehension
 of the workings of Karma. As Lefevre remarks, "the time is
 drawing near when there will remain nothing but three great human
 types" (before the Sixth Root-Race dawns), the white (Aryan,
 Fifth Root-Race), the yellow, and the African negro -- with their
 crossings (Atlanto-European divisions). Redskins, Eskimos, Papuans,
 Australians, Polynesians, etc., etc. -- all are dying out. Those
 who realize that every Root-Race runs through a gamut of seven
 sub-races with seven branchlets, etc., will understand the "why."
 The tide-wave of incarnating <b>E</b>GOS has rolled past them
 to harvest experience in more developed and less senile stocks;
 and their extinction is hence a Karmic necessity. Some extraordinary
 and <i>unexplained </i>statistics as to Race extinction are given
 in de Quatrefages' "<i>Human Species,</i>" p. 428 <i>et
 seq. </i>No solution, except on the occult lines, is able to account
 for these.
 </p><p>
 But we have digressed from our direct subject. Let us hear now
 what Professor Huxley has to say on the subject of former Atlantic
 and Pacific Continents.
 </p><p>
 He writes in "<b>N</b>ATURE," Nov. 4th, 1880: "There
 is nothing, so far as I am aware, in the biological or geological
 evidence at present accessible, to render untenable the hypothesis
 that <i>an area of the mid</i>-</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 781 TRADITION AS TRUE AS HISTORY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <i>Atlantic or Pacific sea-bed as big as Europe, </i>should have
 been uplifted as high as Mont Blanc, and have subsided again,
 any time since the Palaeozoic epoch, if there were any grounds
 for entertaining it."
 </p><p>
 That is to say, then, that there is nothing which can militate
 against <i>positive </i>evidence to the fact; nothing, therefore,
 against the geological postulates of the Esoteric Philosophy.
 Dr. Seemann assures us in the "Popular Science Review"
 (Vol. V., p. 18), article "<i>Australia and Europe formerly
 one Continent,</i>"<i>* </i>that: --
 </p><p>
 "The facts which botanists have accumulated for reconstructing
 these lost maps of the globe are rather comprehensive; and they
 have not been backward in demonstrating the former existence of
 large tracts of solid land in parts now occupied by the great
 oceans. The many striking points of contact between the present
 flora of the United States and Eastern Asia, induced them to assume
 that, during the present order of things, there existed a continental
 connection between South-Eastern Asia and Western America. The
 singular correspondence of the present flora of the Southern United
 States with that of the lignite flora of Europe induces them to
 believe that, <i>in the Miocene period, Europe and America were
 connected by a land passage, of which Iceland, Madeira, and the
 other Atlantic islands are remnants</i>;<i> that, in fact, the
 story of an Atlantis, which an Egyptian priest told to Solon,
 is not purely fictitious, but rests on a solid historical basis</i>.
 . . . Europe of the Eocene period received the plants which spread
 over mountains and plains, valleys and river-banks (from Asia
 generally), neither exclusively from the South nor from the East.
 The west also furnished additions, and if at that period these
 were rather meagre, they show, at all events, that the bridge
 was already building, which, at a late period, was to facilitate
 communication between the two continents in such a remarkable
 manner. At that time some plants of the Western Continent began
 to reach Europe by means of the <i>island of Atlantis, </i>then
 probably just rising (?) above the ocean."
 </p><p>
 And in another number of the same review (Vol. I., p. 143) Mr.
 Duppa Crotch, <strong>M.A</strong>., <strong>F.L.S</strong>.,
 in an article entitled "<i>The Norwegian Lemming and its
 Migrations,</i>"<i> </i>alludes to the same subject.
 </p><p>
 "Is it probable that land could have existed where now the
 broad Atlantic rolls? All tradition says so: old Egyptian records
 speak of Atlantis, as Strabo and others have told us. The Sahara
 itself is the sand of an ancient sea, and the shells which are
 found upon its surface
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Undoubtedly a fact and a confirmation of the esoteric conception
 of the Lemuria which originally not only embraced great areas
 in the Indian and Pacific oceans, but projected round South Africa
 into the North Atlantic. Its Atlantic portion subsequently became
 the geological basis of the future home of the Fourth Race Atlanteans.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 782 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 prove that, no longer ago than the Miocene period, a sea rolled
 over what is now desert. The voyage of the 'Challenger' has proved
 the existence of <i>three long ridges* in the Atlantic Ocean,**
 one extending for more than three thousand miles, </i>and lateral
 spurs may, by connecting these ridges, account for <i>the marvellous
 similarity of the fauna of the Atlantic islands.*** </i>. . .
 . The submerged continent of <b>L</b>EMURIA, in what is now the
 Indian Ocean, <i>is considered to afford an explanation of many
 difficulties in the distribution of organic life, </i>and, I think,
 the existence of a <b>M</b>IOCENE <b>A</b>TLANTIS will be found
 to have a <i>strong elucidative bearing on subjects of greater
 interest </i>[Truly So!] than the migration of the lemming. At
 all events, if it can be shown that land existed in former ages
 where the North Atlantic now rolls, not only is a motive found
 for these apparently suicidal migrations, but also a strong collateral
 proof that what we call instincts are but the blind and sometimes
 even prejudicial inheritance of previously acquired experiences."
 </p><p>
 (At certain periods, we learn, multitudes of these animals swim
 to sea and perish. Coming, as they do, from all parts of Norway,
 the powerful instinct which survives throughout ages as an inheritance
 from their progenitors impels them to seek a continent, once existing
 but now submerged beneath the ocean, and to court a watery grave.)
 </p><p>
 In an article containing a criticism of Mr. A. R. Wallace's "Island
 Life" -- a work devoted largely to the question of the distribution
 of animals, etc. -- Mr. Starkie Gardiner writes ("Subsidence
 and Elevation," Geological Magazine, June, 1881): --
 </p><blockquote>
 "By a process of reasoning supported by a large array of
 facts of different kinds, he arrives at the conclusion that the
 distribution of life upon the land as we now see it, has been
 accomplished without the aid of important changes in the relative
 positions of continents and seas. Yet if we accept his views,
 we must believe that Asia and Africa, Madagascar and Africa, New
 Zealand and Australia, Europe and America, have been united at
 some period not remote geologically, and that seas to the depth
 of 1,000 fathoms have been bridged over; but we must treat as
 utterly gratuitous and entirely opposed to
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Cf. the published reports of the "Challenger" expedition;
 also Donnelly's "Atlantis," p. 468 and pp. 46-56, chap.
 "<i>The Testimony of the Sea.</i>"
 </p><p>
 ** Even the cautious Lefevre speaks of the existence of <i>Tertiary
 </i>men on "upheaved lands, islands and continents then flourishing,
 but since submerged beneath the waters," and elsewhere introduces
 a "<i>possible </i>Atlantis" to explain ethnological
 facts. Cf. his "<i>Philosophy,</i>"<i> Eng. Ed., pp.
 </i>478 and 504. Mr. Donnelly remarks with rare intuition that
 "modern civilization is <i>Atlantean </i>. . . . the '<i>inventive</i>'<i>
 faculty of the present age is taking up the delegated work of
 Creation where Atlantis left it thousands of years ago</i>"
 (Atlantis, p. 133). He also refers the origin of culture to the
 <i>Miocene </i>times. It is, however, to be sought for in the
 teachings given to the <i>Third Race</i>-men by their Divine Rulers
 -- at a vastly earlier period.
 </p><p>
 *** An equally "curious" similarity is traced between
 some of the West Indian and West African fauna.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 783 ATLANTIS, NECESSARY TO ETHNOLOGY. </h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 all the evidences at our command (!!), the supposition that temperate
 Europe and temperate America, Australia, and South America, have
 ever been connected except by way of the Arctic or Antarctic circles
 and that lands now separated by seas of more than 1,000 fathoms
 depth have ever been united. Mr. Wallace, it must be admitted,
 has succeeded in explaining the chief features of existing life-distribution,
 without bridging the Atlantic or Pacific, except towards the Poles,
 yet I cannot help thinking that some of the facts <i>might perhaps
 be more easily explained by admitting the former existence of
 the connection between the coast of Chile and Polynesia* and Great
 Britain and Florida, </i>shadowed by the submarine banks which
 stretch between them. Nothing is urged that renders the more direct
 connection impossible, and no <i>physical reason is advanced why
 the floor of the ocean should not be upheaved from any depth.
 </i>The route by which (according to the anti-Atlantean and Lemurian
 hypotheses of Wallace) the <i>floras </i>of South America and
 Australia are supposed to have mingled, is beset by almost insurmountable
 obstacles, and the apparently sudden arrival of a number of sub-tropical
 American plants in our Eocene flora, necessitates a connection
 more to the south than the present 1,000 fathom line . . . . forces
 are unceasingly acting, and there is <i>no reason why an elevating
 force once set in action in the centre of an ocean should cease
 to act until a continent is formed. </i>They have acted and lifted
 out from the sea, in comparatively recent geological times, the
 loftiest mountains on earth. Mr. Wallace himself admits repeatedly
 that sea-beds have been elevated 1,000 fathoms and islands have
 risen up from the depths of 3,000 fathoms; and to suppose that
 the upheaving forces are limited in power, is, it seems to me,
 'utterly gratuitous and entirely opposed to all the evidences
 at our command.' "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The "Father" of English Geology -- Sir Charles Lyell
 -- was an Uniformitarian in his views of continental formation.
 On page 492 of his "Antiquity of Man" we find him saying:
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Professor Unger (Die versunkene Insel Atlantis) and Heer
 (Flora Tertiaria Helvetiae) have admitted on botanical grounds
 the <i>former existence of an Atlantic Continent during some part
 of the Tertiary Period</i>, as affording the only plausible explanation
 that can be imagined of the analogy between the Miocene flora
 of central Europe, and the existing flora of Eastern America.
 Professor Oliver, on the other hand, after showing how many of
 the American types found fossil in Europe are common to Japan,
 inclines to the theory, first advanced by Dr. Asa Gray, that the
 migration of species, to which the community of types in the Eastern
 States of North America, and the Miocene flora of Europe is due,
 took place when there was an overland communication from America
 to central Asia between the fiftieth and sixtieth parallels of
 latitude, or south of Behring Straits, following the direction
 of the Aleutian islands. By this course they <i>may </i>have made
 their way, at any epoch, Miocene, Pliocene, or Pleistocene, antecedently
 to the Glacial Epoch, to Amoorland, on the East coast of North
 Asia."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The unnecessary difficulties and complications here incurred in
 order to avoid the hypothesis of an Atlantic Continent, are really
 too
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Pacific portion of the giant Lemurian Continent christened
 by Dr. Carter Blake, the anthropologist, "Pacificus."
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 784 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 apparent to escape notice. <i>If the botanical evidences stood
 alone, </i>scepticism would be half legitimate; but in this case
 all branches of science converge to one point. Science has made
 blunders, and has exposed itself to greater errors than the admission
 of our two now invisible continents, would lay it open to. It
 has denied even the undeniable, from the days of the mathematician
 Laplace down to our own, and that only a few years ago.* We have
 Professor Huxley's authority for saying that there is no <i>a
 priori</i> improbability whatever against possible evidences supporting
 the belief. (<i>Vide supra.</i>) But now that the POSITIVE EVIDENCE
 <i>is brought forward, </i>will that eminent scientist admit the
 corollary?
 </p><p>
 Touching on the problem in another place ("<i>Principles
 of Geology,</i>"<i> </i>pp. 12-13), Sir Charles Lyell tells
 us: "Respecting the cosmogony of the Egyptian priests, we
 gather much information from writers of the Grecian sects, who
 borrowed almost all their tenets from Egypt, and amongst others
 that of the former successive destruction and renovation of the
 world. (<i>Continental, </i>not cosmic, catastrophes.) We learn
 from Plutarch that this was the theme of one of the hymns of Orpheus,
 so celebrated in the fabulous ages of Greece. It was brought by
 him from the banks of the Nile; and we even find in his verses,
 as in the Indian systems, a definite period assigned for the duration
 of every successive World. The returns of great catastrophes were
 determined by the present period of the Magnus Annus, or great
 year -- a cycle composed of the revolutions of the sun, moon,
 and planets, and terminating when these return together to the
 sign whence they were supposed at some remote epoch to set out.
 We learn particularly from the <i>Timaeus </i>of Plato <i>that
 the Egyptians believed the world to be subject to occasional conflagrations
 and deluges. </i>The sect of the Stoics adopted most fully the
 system of catastrophes destined at intervals to destroy the world.
 These, they taught, were of two kinds -- the cataclysm, <i>or</i>
 <i>destruction by water, </i>and the <i>Ecpyrosis, or destruction
 by fire </i>(submarine volcanoes). From the Egyptians they derived
 the doctrine of the gradual debasement of man from a state of
 innocence" (nascent simplicity of the first sub-races of
 each Root-Race). "Towards the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * When Howard read, before the Royal Society of London, a paper
 on the first serious researches that were made on the aerolites,
 the Geneva naturalist Pictet, who was present, communicated, on
 his return to Paris, the facts reported to the French Academy
 of Sciences. But he was forthwith interrupted by Laplace, the
 great astronomer, who cried: "Stop! we have had enough of
 such <i>fables, </i>and know all about them," thus making
 Pictet feel very small. Globular-shaped lightnings or thunderbolts
 have been admitted by Science only since Arago demonstrated their
 existence, says de Rochat ("<i>Forces non-definies,</i>"<i>
 </i>p. 4): "Every one remembers Dr. Bouilland's misadventure
 at the Academy of Medicine when he had declared Edison's phonograph
 <i>'a trick of ventriloquism! ` </i>"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 785 ASTRAEA FALLS ON HER HEAD. </h6>
 
 <p>
 termination of each era the gods could no longer bear with the
 wickedness of man, and a shock of the elements, or a deluge, overwhelmed
 them; (vide degeneracy into magical practices and gross animality
 of the Atlanteans) after which calamity, Astraea again descended
 on the earth to renew the golden age." (Dawn of a new Root-Race.)
 </p><p>
 <i>Astraea, </i>the goddess of justice, is the last of the deities
 to forsake the earth, when the gods are said to abandon it and
 <i>be taken up into heaven by Jupiter again. </i>But, no sooner
 does Zeus carry away from earth Ganymedes (the object of <i>lust,
 </i>personified) than the father of the gods throws down Astraea
 back on the earth again, on which she <i>falls upon her head.
 </i>Astraea is <i>Virgo, </i>the constellation of the Zodiac.
 Astronomically it has a very plain significance, and one which
 gives the Key to the occult meaning. But it is inseparable from
 <i>Leo, </i>the sign that precedes it, and from the Pleiades and
 their sisters, the Hyades, of which Aldebaran is the brilliant
 leader. All of these are connected with the periodical renovations
 of the earth, with regard to its continents -- even Ganymedes,
 who in astronomy is Aquarius. It was already shown that while
 the South Pole is the <i>pit </i>(or the infernal regions figuratively
 and cosmologically), the North Pole is geographically the first
 continent; while astronomically and metaphorically the celestial
 pole, with its pole star in <i>heaven, </i>is Meru, or the seat
 of Brahma, the throne of Jupiter, etc. For in the age when the
 gods forsook the earth and were said to ascend into heaven, the
 ecliptic had become parallel with the meridian, and part of the
 Zodiac appeared to descend from the north pole to the north horizon.
 Aldebaran was in conjunction then with the Sun, as it was 40,000
 years ago, at the great festival in commemoration of that Magnus
 Annus, of which Plutarch was speaking. Since that year (40,000
 years ago) there has been a retrograde motion of the equator,
 and about 31,000 years ago Aldebaran was in conjunction with the
 vernal equinoctial point. The part assigned to <i>Taurus, </i>even
 in Christian mysticism, is too well known to need repetition.
 The famous Orphic hymn on the great periodical cataclysm divulges
 the whole esotericism of the event. Pluto (in the pit) carries
 off Eurydice, bitten by the (polar) serpent. Then Leo, the <i>lion,
 </i>is vanquished. Now, when the Lion is <i>in the pit, </i>or
 below the south pole, then Virgo, as the next sign, follows him,
 and when her head, down to the waist, is <i>below </i>the South
 horizon -- she is <i>inverted. </i>On the other hand, the Hyades
 are the rain or <i>Deluge </i>constellations; and <i>Aldebaran
 </i>(he who follows, or <i>succeeds </i>the daughters of Atlas,
 or the Pleiades) looks down from the eye of Taurus. It is from
 this point of the ecliptic that the calculations of the new cycle
 were commenced. The student has to remember also, that when Ganymedes
 (<i>Aquarius</i>)<i> </i>is raised to</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 786 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 heaven (or above the horizon of the North Pole) <i>Virgo </i>or
 Astraea, who <i>is Venus-Lucifer, </i>descends head downwards
 below the horizon of the South Pole, or the pit; which <i>pit</i>,
 or the pole, is also the Great Dragon, or the Flood. Let the student
 exercise his intuition by placing these facts together; no more
 can be said.
 </p><p>
 "The connection," comments Lyell, "between the
 doctrine of successive catastrophes and repeated deteriorations
 in the moral character of the human race, is more intimate and
 natural than might at first be imagined. For, in a rude state
 of society, all great calamities are regarded by the people as
 judgments of God on the wickedness of man. . . . In like manner
 in the account given to Solon by the Egyptian priests of the submersion
 of the island of Atlantis under the waters of the ocean, after
 repeated shocks of an earthquake, we find that <i>the event happened
 when Jupiter had seen the moral depravity of the inhabitants.</i>"
 </p><p>
 True; but was it not owing to the fact that all esoteric truths
 were given out to the public by the Initiates of the temples <i>under
 the guise of allegories? </i>"Jupiter," is merely the
 personification of that immutable Cyclic Law, which arrests the
 downward tendency of each Root-Race, after attaining the zenith
 of its glory.* Unless we hold with Prof. John Fiske's singularly
 dogmatic opinion** that <i>every</i> myth "is an explanation
 by the uncivilized mind, of some natural phenomenon; not an allegory,
 not an esoteric symbol, for the ingenuity is wasted (! !) which
 strives to detect in myths the remnants of a refined primeval
 science -- but an explanation. Primitive men had no profound science
 to perpetuate by means of allegory [How does Mr. Fiske know?],
 nor were they such sorry pedants as to talk in riddles when plain
 language would serve their purpose." We venture to say the
 language of the <i>Initiated </i>few<i> </i>was far more "plain,"
 and their science-philosophy far more com-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Cyclic Law of Race-Evolution is most unwelcome to scientists.
 It is sufficient to mention the fact of "primeval civilization"
 to excite the frenzy of Darwinians; it being obvious that the
 further culture and science is pushed back, the more precarious
 becomes the basis of the ape-ancestor theory. But as Jacolliot
 says: -- "Whatever there may be in these traditions (submerged
 continents, etc.), and whatever may have been the place where
 a civilization more ancient than that of Rome, of Greece, of Egypt,
 and of India, was developed, <i>it is certain that this civilization
 did exist, </i>and it is highly important for Science to recover
 its traces, however feeble and fugitive they be." (<i>Histoire
 des Vierges</i>;<i> les peuples et les continents disparus, p.
 </i>15<i>.</i>)<i> </i>Donnelly has proved the fact from the clearest
 premises, but the Evolutionists will not listen. A <i>Miocene
 </i>civilization upsets the "universal stone-age" theory,
 and that of a <i>continuous </i>ascent of man from animalism!
 And yet Egypt, at least, runs counter to current hypotheses. There
 is no stone-age visible there, but a more glorious culture is
 apparent, the further back we are enabled to carry our retrospect.
 (Verb. Sap.)
 </p><p>
 ** "Myths and Myth-Makers," p. 21.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 787 INGENIOUS EXPLANATIONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 prehensive and satisfying alike to the physical and <i>spiritual
 </i>wants of man, than even the terminology and system respectively
 elaborated by Mr. Fiske's Master -- Herbert Spencer. What, however,
 is Sir Charles Lyell's "explanation" of the "myth"?
 Certainly, he in no way countenances the idea of its "astronomical"
 origin, as asserted by some writers.
 </p><p>
 The two interpreters are entirely at variance with one another.
 Lyell's solution is as follows. A disbeliever in cataclysmal changes,
 from the absence (?) of any reliable historical data on the point,
 as well as from a strong bias to the Uniformitarian conceptions
 of geologic changes,* he attempts to trace the Atlantis "tradition"
 to the following sources: --
 </p><p>
 (1) Barbarous tribes connect catastrophes with an avenging God,
 who is assumed in this way to punish immoral races.
 </p><p>
 (2)<i> Hence </i>the commencement of a new race is logically a
 virtuous one.
 </p><p>
 (3) The primary source of the geologic basis of the tradition
 was Asia -- a continent subject to violent earthquakes. Exaggerated
 accounts would thus be handed down the ages.
 </p><p>
 (4) Egypt, being herself free from earthquakes, nevertheless based
 her not inconsiderable geologic knowledge on these cataclysmal
 traditions.
 </p><p>
 An ingenious "explanation," as all such are. But proving
 a negative is proverbially a difficult task. Students of esoteric
 science, who know what the resources of the Egyptian priesthood
 really were, need no such laboured hypothesis. Moreover, while
 an imaginative theorist is always able to furnish a reasonable
 solution of problems which, in one branch of science, seem to
 necessitate the hypothesis of periodical cataclysmic changes on
 the surface of our planet, the impartial critic, who is not a
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Violent minor cataclysms and colossal earthquakes are recorded
 in the annals of most nations -- if not of all. Elevation and
 subsidence of continents is always in progress. The whole coast
 of South America has been raised up 10 to 15 feet and settled
 down again in an hour. Huxley has shown that the British islands
 have been four times depressed beneath the ocean and subsequently
 raised again and peopled. The Alps, Himalayas and Cordilleras
 were all the result of depositions drifted on to sea-bottoms and
 upheaved by Titanic forces to their present elevation. The Sahara
 was the basin of a Miocene sea. Within the last five or six thousand
 years the shores of Sweden, Denmark and Norway have risen from
 200 to 600 feet; in Scotland there are raised beaches with outlying
 stacks and skerries <i>surmounting </i>the shore now eroded by
 the hungry wave. The North of Europe is still rising from the
 sea and South America presents the phenomenon of raised beaches
 of over 1,000 miles in length, now at a height varying from 100
 to 1,300 feet above the sea-level. On the other hand, the coast
 of Greenland is sinking fast, so much so that the Greenlander
 will not build by the shore. All these phenomena are certain.
 <i>Why may not a gradual change have given place to a violent
 cataclysm in remote epochs? -- </i>such cataclysms occurring on
 a <i>minor scale </i>even now (<i>e.g</i>., the case of Sunda
 island with 80,000 Malays).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 788 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 specialist, will recognise the immense difficulty of explaining
 away the <i>cumulative</i> evidences, -- namely, the archaeological,
 ethnological, geological, traditional, botanical, and even biological
 -- in favour of former continents now submerged. When each science
 is fighting for its own hand, the cumulative force of the evidence
 in its collectivity is almost invariably lost sight of.
 </p><p>
 In the "<i>Theosophist</i>"<i> </i>(August, 1880), we
 wrote: "We have as evidences the most ancient traditions
 of various and wide-separated peoples -- legends in India, in
 ancient Greece, Madagascar, Sumatra, Java, and all the principal
 isles of Polynesia, as well as the legends of both Americas. Among
 savages; and in the traditions of the richest literature in the
 world -- the Sanskrit literature of India -- there is an agreement
 in saying, that, ages ago, <i>there existed in the Pacific Ocean,
 a large Continent, which by a geological cataclysm was engulfed
 by the sea,* </i>(Lemuria). And it is our firm belief . . . that
 most, if not all, of the islands from the Malayan archipelago
 to Polynesia, are fragments of that once immense submerged Continent.
 Both Malacca and Polynesia, which lie at the two extremities of
 the ocean, and which, since the memory of man never had, and never
 could have any intercourse with, or even a knowledge of each other,
 have yet a tradition common to all the islands and islets, that
 their respective countries extended far, far into the Sea: that
 there were in the world but two immense continents, one inhabited
 by yellow, the other by dark men; and that the Ocean, by command
 of the gods, and to punish them for their incessant quarrelling,
 swallowed them up. Notwithstanding the geographical proof that
 New Zealand, the Sandwich and Easter Islands, are at a distance
 from each other of between 800 and 1,000 leagues, and that, according
 to every testimony, neither these nor any other intermediate islands,
 for instance, the Marquesan, Society, Fiji, Tahitian, Samoan,
 and other islands, could, since they became islands, ignorant
 as their people were of the compass, have communicated with each
 other before the arrival of Europeans; yet they one and all maintain
 that their respective countries extended far toward the West,
 on the Asian side. Moreover, with very small differences, they
 all speak dialects evidently of the same language; and understand
 each other with little difficulty; have the same religious beliefs
 and superstitions; and pretty much the same customs. And as few
 of the Polynesian islands were discovered earlier than a century
 ago, the Pacific Ocean itself being unknown to Europe till the
 days of Columbus, and as these islanders have never ceased repeating
 the same old traditions since the Europeans first set
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * For the opinions of Jacolliot, after long travels through the
 Polynesian Islands and his proofs of a former great geological
 cataclysm in the Pacific Ocean, see his "<i>Histoire des
 Vierges</i>:<i> Peuples et Continents disparus,</i>"<i> </i>p.
 308.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 789 HAECKEL FOR ONCE IS RIGHT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 foot on their shores, it seems to us a logical inference that
 our theory is nearer to the truth than any other. "Chance
 would have to change its name and meaning, were all this due but
 to chance alone."
 </p><p>
 "A great series of animal-geographical facts," declares
 Professor Schmidt, writing in defence of the hypothesis of a former
 Lemuria, "is explicable only on the theory of the former
 existence of <i>a Southern Continent of which Australia is a remnant</i>.
 .<i> </i>. . . " [the distribution of species] "points
 to the vanished land of the South where perhaps the <i>home of
 the progenitors of the Maki of Madagascar </i>may also be looked
 for."*
 </p><p>
 Mr. A. R. Wallace, in his "Malay Archipelago," arrives
 at the following conclusion after a review of the mass of evidence
 at hand: -- "The inference that we must draw from these facts
 is undoubtedly that the whole of the islands eastwards beyond
 Borneo and Sumatra do essentially form part of <i>a former Australian
 or Pacific Continent </i>. . . This continent must have been broken
 up before the extreme south-eastern portion of Asia was raised
 above the waters of the ocean, for a great part of the land of
 Borneo and Java is known to be geologically of quite recent formation."
 </p><p>
 According to Haeckel: -- "Southern Asia itself was not the
 earliest cradle of the human race, but <i>Lemuria, a continent
 that lay to the South of Asia, and sank later on beneath the surface
 of the Indian Ocean.</i>"<i> </i>("<i>Pedigree of Man,</i>"<i>
 Eng. Trans. p. </i>73.) In one sense Haeckel is right as to Lemuria
 -- the "cradle of the Human race." That continent <i>was</i>
 the home of the first <i>physical </i>Human Stock -- the later
 Third-Race Men. Previous to that epoch the Races were far less
 consolidated and physiologically quite different. (Haeckel makes
 Lemuria extend from <i>Sunda Island to Africa and Madagascar </i>and
 eastwards <i>to Upper India.</i>)
 </p><p>
 Professor Rutimeyer, the eminent Palaeontologist, asks: -- "Need
 the conjecture that the almost exclusively graminivorous and insectivorous
 marsupials, sloths, armadilloes, ant-eaters and ostriches, once
 possessed an actual point of union in <i>a Southern Continent
 of which the present flora of Terra del Fuego and Australia must
 be the remains -- </i>need this conjecture raise difficulties
 at a moment when from their fossil remains, Heer restores to sight
 the ancient forests of Smith's Sound and Spitzbergen." (<i>Cited
 in Schmidt</i>'<i>s </i>"<i>Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,</i>"<i>
 p</i>. 237.)
 </p><p>
 Having now dealt generally with the broad scientific attitude
 on the two questions, it will, perhaps, conduce to an agreeable
 brevity, if we sum up the more striking isolated facts in favour
 of that fundamental contention of Esoteric Ethnologists -- the
 reality of Atlantis. Lemuria
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <i>* </i>"<i>Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,</i>"<i>
 </i>p. 236. (Cf. also his lengthy arguments on the subject, pp.
 231-7.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 790 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is so widely accepted, that further pursuit of the subject is
 unnecessary. With regard, however, to the former, it is found
 that: --
 </p><p>
 (1) The Miocene flora of Europe have their most numerous and striking
 analogues in the flora of the United States. In the forests of
 Virginia and Florida are found the magnolias, tulip-trees, evergreen
 oaks, plane trees, etc., etc., etc., which correspond with European
 Tertiary flora term for term. How was the migration effected,
 if we exclude the theory of an Atlantic Continent bridging the
 ocean between America and Europe? The proposed "explanation"
 to the effect that the transition was by way of Asia and the Aleutian
 islands is a mere uncalled-for theory, obviously upset by the
 fact that a large number of these flora <i>only appear </i>EAST<i>
 of the Rocky Mountains. </i>This also negatives the idea of a
 trans-Pacific migration. They are now superseded by European continents
 and islands to the North.
 </p><p>
 (2) Skulls exhumed on the banks of the Danube and Rhine bear <i>a</i>
 <i>striking similarity to those of the Caribs and Old Peruvians
 </i>(Littre). Monuments have been exhumed in Central America,
 which bear <i>representations of undoubted negro heads and faces.
 </i>How are such facts to be accounted for except on the Atlantean
 hypothesis? What is now N. W. Africa was once connected with Atlantis
 by a network of islands, few of which now remain.
 </p><p>
 (3) According to Farrar ("<i>Families of Speech</i>")
 the<i> </i>"<i>isolated</i> language" of the Basques
 has no affinities with the other languages* of Europe, but with
 "<i>the aboriginal languages of the vast opposite continent
 </i>(America) <i>and those alone.</i>"<i> </i>Professor Broca
 is also of the same opinion.
 </p><p>
 Palaeolithic European man of the Miocene and Pliocene times was
 a pure Atlantean, as we have previously stated. The Basques are,
 of course, of a much later date than this, but their affinities,
 as here shown, go far to prove the original extraction of their
 remote ancestors. The "mysterious" affinity between
 their tongue and that of the Dravidian races of India will be
 understood by those who have followed our outline of continental
 formations and shiftings.
 </p><p>
 (4)<i> Stones have been found in the Canary Islands bearing sculptured
 symbols similar to those found on the shore of Lake Superior.
 </i>Berthollet was induced
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * For further facts as to the <i>isolation </i>of the Basques
 in Europe and their ethnological relations, cf. Joly, "<i>Man
 before Metals,</i>"<i> </i>p. 316. B. Davis is disposed to
 concede, from an examination of the skulls of the <i>Guanches
 of the Canary Islands and modern Basques, </i>that both belong
 to a race proper to <i>those ancient islands, of which the Canaries
 are the remains!! </i>This is a step in advance indeed. De Quatrefages
 and Hamy also both assign the Cro-Magnon men of South France and
 the Guanches to <i>one type -- </i>a proposition which involves
 a certain corollary which both these writers may not care to father.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 791 FINAL AND IRREFUTABLE EVIDENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 by such evidence to postulate the unity of race of the early men
 of Canary Islands and America (Cf. Benjamin, the "<i>Atlantic
 Islands,</i>" p<i>. </i>130.)
 </p><p>
 The Guanches of the Canary Islands were lineal descendants of
 the Atlanteans. This fact will account for the <i>great stature
 </i>evidenced by their old skeletons, as well as by those of their
 European congeners the Cro-Magnon Palaeolithic men.
 </p><p>
 (5) Any experienced mariner has but to navigate the fathomless
 ocean along the <i>Canary Islands </i>to ask himself the question
 when or how that group of volcanic and rocky little islands has
 been formed, surrounded on every side by that vast watery space.
 Such frequent questions led finally to the expedition of the famous
 Leopold von Buch, which took place in the first quarter of the
 present century. Some geologists maintained that the volcanic
 islands had been raised right from the bottom of the ocean, the
 depth of which in the immediate vicinity of the island varies
 from 6,000 to 18,000 feet. Others were inclined to see in these
 groups, including Madeira, the Azores, and the islands of Cape
 de Verdes -- the remnants of a gigantic but submerged continent
 which had once united Africa with America. The latter men of science
 supported their hypothesis by a mass of evidence in its favour,
 drawn from ancient "myths." Hoary "superstitions,"
 such as the fairy-like Atlantis of Plato, the <i>Garden of Hesperides,
 </i>Atlas supporting the world on his shoulders, all of them mythoi
 connected with the peak of Teneriffe, did not go far with sceptical
 Science. The identity of animal and vegetable species -- showing
 either a previous connection between America and the remaining
 groups of the islands -- (the hypothesis of their having been
 drifted from the New to the Old World by the waves was too absurd
 to stand long) -- found more serious consideration. But it is
 only quite lately, and after Donnelly's book had been published
 several years, that the theory has greater chances than ever of
 becoming an accepted fact. <i>Fossils found on the Eastern Coast
 of South America have now been proved to belong to the Jurassic
 formations, and are nearly identical with the Jurassic fossils
 of Western Europe and Northern Africa. The geological structure
 of both coasts is also almost identical</i>;<i> </i>the resemblance
 between the smaller marine animals dwelling in the more shallow
 waters of South America, the Western African, and the South European
 coasts, is also very great. All such facts are bound to bring
 naturalists to the conclusion that there has been, in distant
 pre-historic ages, a continent which extended from the coast of
 Venezuela, across the Atlantic Ocean, to the Canarese Islands
 and North Africa, and from Newfoundland nearly to the coast of
 France.
 </p><p>
 (6) The great resemblance between the Jurassic fossils of South
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 792 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 America, North Africa, and Western Europe is a striking enough
 fact in itself, and admits of no explanation, unless the ocean
 is bridged with an Atlantis. But why, also, is there so <i>marked
 a similarity between the fauna</i> (animal life) <i>of the --
 </i>now -- <i>isolated Atlantic islands? </i>Why did the specimens
 of <i>Brazilian fauna </i>dredged up by Sir C. Wyville Thompson
 resemble those of <i>Western Europe? </i>Why does a resemblance
 exist between many of the <i>West African </i>and<i> West Indian
 </i>animal groups? Again:
 </p><p>
 "When the animals and plants of the Old and New World are
 compared, one <i>cannot but be struck with their identity</i>;<i>
 </i>all, nearly all belong to the same genera, while many, even
 of the species, are common to both continents . . . indicating
 that they radiated <i>from a common centre</i>" (<i>Atlantis</i>)<i>,
 </i>("<i>Westminster Review,</i>"<i> </i>Jan., 1872).
 </p><p>
 The horse, according to Science, originated in America. At least,
 a large proportion of the once "missing links" connecting
 it with inferior forms have been exhumed from American strata.
 <i>How did the horse penetrate into Europe and Asia, if no land
 communication bridged the oceanic interspaces? </i>Or if it is
 asserted that the horse originated in the New World, how did such
 forms as the hipparion, etc., get into America in the first instance
 on the migration hypothesis?
 </p><p>
 Again "Buffon had . . . remarked in the <i>repetition of
 the African in the American fauna, </i>how, for example, the <i>lama
 </i>is a juvenescent and feeble <i>copy of the camel, </i>and
 how the <i>puma </i>of the New <i>represented the lion </i>of
 the Old World" (<i>Schmidt, </i>"<i>Doctrine of Descent
 and Darwinism,</i>"<i> p. </i>223)<i>.</i> 
 </p><p>
 (7) The following quotation runs with No. (2), but its significance
 is such and the writer cited so authoritative, that it deserves
 a place to itself: --
 </p><p>
 "With regard to the <i>primitive dolichocephalae of America,
 </i>I entertain a hypothesis still more bold, namely, that they
 are <i>nearly related to the Guanches of the Canary Islands, and
 to the Atlantic populations of Africa, </i>the Moors, Tuaricks,
 Copts, which Latham comprises under the name of Egyptian-Atlantidae.
 We find <i>one and the same form of skull in the Canary Islands,
 in front of the African coast, and in the Carib islands, on the
 opposite coast which faces Africa. </i>The colour of the skin
 on both sides of the Atlantic is represented in these populations
 as being of a reddish-brown." (Professor Retzius, "Smithsonian
 Report," 1859, p. 266.)
 </p><p>
 If, then, Basques and Cro-Magnon Cave-Men are of the same race
 as the Canarese Guanches, it follows that the former are also
 allied to the aborigines of America. This is the conclusion which
 the independent investigations of Retzius, Virchow, and de Quatrefages
 necessitate. The <i>Atlantean affinities </i>of these three types
 become patent.
 </p><p>
 (8) The sea-soundings undertaken by <strong>H.M.S</strong>. "Challenger"
 and the "Dolphin," have established the fact that a
 huge elevation some 3,000 <i>miles in length, </i>projecting upwards
 from the abysmal depths of the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 793 RECENT SUGGESTIVE DISCOVERIES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Atlantic, extends from a point near the British Islands southwards,
 curving round near Cape de Verde, and running in a south-easterly
 direction along the West African Coast. This elevation averages
 some<i> 9,000 feet in height, </i>and rises above the waves at
 the Azores, Ascension, and other places. In the ocean depths around
 the neighbourhood of the former the ribs of a former massive piece
 of land have been discovered (<i>vide</i> investigations of United
 States Ship "Dolphin" and others). "The inequalities,
 the <i>mountains and valleys </i>of its surface <i>could never
 have been produced in accordance with any known laws for the deposition
 of sediment, nor by submarine elevation</i>;<i> </i>but, on the
 contrary, must have been carved by agencies acting above the water-level."
 <i>-- </i>(<i>Scientific American, </i>July 28th, 1877). It is
 most probable that necks of land formerly existed knitting Atlantis
 to South America, somewhere above the mouth of the Amazon; to
 Africa near Cape de Verde, while a similar point of juncture with
 Spain is not unlikely, as contended for by Donnelly. (<i>Vide
 </i>his chart, "Atlantis," p. 47, Eng. Ed., 1884, though
 he deals with only a fragment of the <i>real</i> continent.) Whether
 the latter existed or not, is of no consequence, as the fact that
 (what is now) N. W. Africa was -- before the elevation of the
 Sahara and the rupture of the Gibraltar connection -- an extension
 of Spain. Consequently no difficulty can be raised as to how the
 migration of the European fauna (etc.) took place.
 </p><p>
 Enough has now been said from the <i>purely scientific standpoint,
 </i>and it is needless, in view of the manner in which the subject
 has now been developed on the lines of <i>esoteric knowledge,
 </i>to swell the mass of testimony further. In conclusion, the
 words of one of the most intuitive writers of the day may be cited
 as admirably illustrative of the opinions of the occultist, who
 awaits in patience the dawn of the coming day: --
 </p><p>
 "We are but beginning to understand the past; one hundred
 years ago the world knew nothing of Pompeii or Herculaneum; nothing
 of the lingual tie that binds together the Indo-European nations;
 nothing of the significance of the vast volume of inscriptions
 upon the tombs and temples of Egypt; nothing of the meaning of
 the arrow-headed inscriptions of Babylon; nothing of the marvellous
 civilizations revealed in the remains of Yucatan, Mexico, and
 Peru. We are on the threshold. Scientific investigation is advancing
 with giant strides. Who shall say that one hundred years from
 now, the great museums of the world may not be adorned with gems,
 statues, arms, and implements from Atlantis, while the libraries
 of the world shall contain translations of its inscriptions, throwing
 new light upon all the past history of the human race, and all
 the great problems which now perplex the thinkers of to-day."*
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Donnelly, "<i>Atlantis</i>;<i> the Ante-Diluvian World,</i>"<i>
 </i>p. 480.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 794 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 And now to conclude.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 We have concerned ourself with the ancient records of the nations,
 with the doctrine of chronological and psychic cycles, of which
 these records are the tangible proof; and with many other subjects,
 which may, at first sight, seem out of place in this volume.
 </p><p>
 But they were necessary in truth. In dealing with the secret annals
 and traditions of so many nations, whose very origins have never
 been ascertained on more secure grounds than inferential suppositions,
 in giving out the beliefs and philosophy of more than <i>prehistoric
 </i>races, it is not quite as easy to deal with the subject matter
 as it would be if only the philosophy of one special race, and
 its evolution, were concerned. The Secret Doctrine is the common
 property of the countless millions of men born under various climates,
 in times with which History refuses to deal, and to which esoteric
 teachings assign dates incompatible with the theories of Geology
 and Anthropology. The birth and evolution of the Sacred Science
 of the Past are lost in the very night of Time; and that, even,
 which is historic -- <i>i.e.,</i> that which is found scattered
 hither and thither throughout ancient classical literature --
 is, in almost every case, attributed by modern criticism to lack
 of observation in the ancient writers, or to superstition born
 out of the ignorance of antiquity. It is, therefore, impossible
 to treat this subject as one would the ordinary evolution of an
 art or science in some well-known historical nation. It is only
 by bringing before the reader an abundance of proofs all tending
 to show that in every age, under every condition of civilization
 and knowledge, the educated classes of every nation made themselves
 the more or less faithful echoes of one identical system and its
 fundamental traditions -- that he can be made to see that so many
 streams of the same water must have had a common source from which
 they started. What was this source? If coming events are said
 to cast their shadows before, past events cannot fall to leave
 their impress behind them. It is, then, by those shadows of the
 hoary Past and their fantastic silhouettes on the external screen
 of every religion and philosophy, that we can, by checking them
 as we go along, and comparing them, trace out finally the body
 that produced them. There must be truth and fact in that which
 every people of antiquity accepted and made the foundation of
 its religions and its faith. Moreover, as Haliburton said, "Hear
 one side, and you will be in the dark; hear both sides, and all
 will be clear." The public has hitherto had access to, and
 heard but one side -- or rather the two one-sided views of two
 diametrically opposed classes of men, whose <i>prima</i> <i>facie
 </i>propositions or respective premises differ widely, but whose
 final conclusions are the same -- Science and Theology. And now
 our</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 795 OLD MASONIC SYMBOLISM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 readers have an opportunity to hear the other -- the defendants'
 -- justification on and learn the nature of our arguments.
 </p><p>
 Were the public to be left to its old opinions: namely, on one
 side, that Occultism, Magic, the legends of old, etc., were all
 the outcome of ignorance and superstition; and on the other, that
 everything outside the orthodox groove was the work of the devil,
 what would be the result? In other words, had no theosophical
 and mystic literature obtained a hearing for the few last years,
 the present work would have had a poor chance of impartial consideration.
 It would have been proclaimed -- and by many will still be so
 proclaimed -- a fairy tale woven out of abstruse problems, poised
 in, and based on the air; built of soap bubbles, bursting at the
 slightest touch of serious reflection, with <em>no</em> foundation,
 as it would be alleged, to stand upon. Even "the ancient
 <i>superstitious </i>and<i> credulous </i>classics" have
 no word of reference to it in clear and unmistakable terms, and
 the symbols themselves fail to yield a hint at the existence of
 such a system. Such would be the verdict of all. But when it becomes
 undeniably proven that the claim of the modern Asiatic nations
 to a Secret Science and an esoteric history of the world, is based
 on fact; that, though hitherto unknown to the masses and a veiled
 mystery even to the learned, (because they never had the key to
 a right understanding of the abundant hints thrown out by the
 ancient classics), it is still no fairy tale, but an actuality
 -- then the present work will become but the pioneer of many more
 such books. The statement that hitherto even the keys discovered
 by some great scholars have proved too rusty for use, and that
 they were but the silent witnesses that there do exist mysteries
 behind the veil which are unreachable without a new key -- is
 borne out by too many proofs to be easily dismissed. An instance
 may be given as an illustration out of the history of Freemasonry.
 </p><p>
 In his "Franc-maconnerie Occulte," rightly or wrongly,
 Ragon, an illustrious and learned Belgian Mason, reproaches the
 English Masons with having <i>materialized </i>and dishonoured
 Masonry, once based upon the Ancient Mysteries, by adopting, owing
 to a mistaken notion of the origin of the craft, the name of <i>Free
 Masonry </i>and<i> Free Masons. </i>The mistake is due, he says,
 to those who connect Masonry <i>with the building</i> of Solomon's
 Temple, deriving its origin from it. He derides the idea, and
 says: . . "The<i> Franc Mason </i>(which is not <i>macon
 libre, </i>or free masonry) knew well when adopting the title,
 that it was no question of <i>building a wall,</i> but that of
 <i>being initiated into the ancient Mysteries </i>veiled under
 the name of<i> Francmaconnerie </i>(Freemasonry); that his work
 was only to be the continuation or the renovation of the ancient
 mysteries, and that he was to become a <i>mason </i>after the
 manner of <i>Apollo </i>or Amphion. And do not we know that the
 ancient <i>initiated </i>poets, when speaking <i>of the foundation</i>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 796 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 <i>of a city, </i>meant thereby the <i>establishment of a doctrine?
 </i>Thus <i>Neptune,</i> the god of reasoning, and <i>Apollo,
 </i>the god of the <i>hidden </i>things, presented themselves
 as masons before Laomedon, Priam's father, to help him to build
 the city of Troy -- that is to say, to establish the Trojan religion."
 (<i>Maconnerie Orthodoxe, </i>p. 44.)
 </p><p>
 Such <i>veiled </i>sentences with double meaning abound in ancient
 classical writers. Therefore, had an attempt been made to show
 that, <i>e.g.,</i> Laomedon was the founder of a branch of archaic
 mysteries in which the earth-bound material soul (the fourth principle),
 was personified in Menelaus' faithless wife (the fair Helen),
 if Ragon had not come to corroborate what we asserted, we might
 be told that no classical author speaks of it, and that Homer
 shows Laomedon building a<i> city, </i>not an <i>esoteric worship
 </i>or <strong>M</strong>YSTERIES! And who are those left now,
 save a few <i>Initiates, </i>who understand the language and correct
 meaning of such symbolical terms?
 </p><p>
 But after having pointed to many a misconceived symbol bearing
 on our thesis, there still remains more than one difficulty to
 be overcome. Most important among several such obstacles is that
 of chronology. But this could hardly be helped.
 </p><p>
 Wedged in between theological chronology and that of the geologists,
 backed by all the materialistic Anthropologists who assign dates
 to man and nature which fit in with their own theories alone --
 what could the writer do except what is being done? Namely, since
 theology places the Deluge 2448 <strong>B.C</strong>., and the
 World's Creation only 5890 years ago; and since the accurate researches
 by the methods of <i>exact </i>Science, have led the geologists
 and physicists to assign to the incrusted age of our Globe between
 10 million and 1,000 million of years* (a <i>trifling</i> difference,
 verily!): and the Anthropologists to vary their divergence of
 opinion as to the appearance of man -- between 25,000 and 500,000
 of years -- what can one who studies the Occult doctrine do, but
 come out and bravely present the esoteric calculations before
 the world?
 </p><p>
 But to do this, corroboration by even a few "historical"
 proofs was necessary, though all know the real value of the so-called
 "historical evidence." For, whether man had appeared
 on earth 18,000 or 18,000,000 years ago, can make no difference
 to profane History, since it begins hardly a couple of thousand
 years before our era, and since, even then, it grapples hopelessly
 with the clash and din of contradictory and mutually-destroying
 opinions around it. Nevertheless, in view of the respect the average
 reader has been brought up in for exact science, even that short
 <i>Past </i>would remain meaningless, unless the esoteric teachings
 were corroborated and supported on the spot --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <i>Vide </i>Sir W. Thomson and Mr. Huxley.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 797 THE PROLOGUE TO ESOTERIC TRUTH.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <i>whenever possible</i> -- by<i> </i>references to historical
 names of a so-called <i>historical </i>period. This is the only
 guide that can be given to the beginner before he is permitted
 to start among the (to him) unfamiliar windings of that dark labyrinth
 called the pre-historic ages. This necessity has been complied
 with. It is only hoped that the desire to do so, which has led
 the writer to be constantly bringing ancient and modern evidence
 as a corroboration of the Archaic and quite unhistoric Past, will
 not bring on her the accusation of having sorely jumbled up without
 order or method the various and widely-separated periods of history
 and tradition. But literary form and method had to be sacrificed
 to the greater clearness of the general exposition.
 </p><p>
 To accomplish the proposed task, the writer had to resort to the
 rather unusual means of dividing each volume or Book into three
 Parts; the first of which only is the consecutive, though very
 fragmentary, history of the Cosmogony and the Evolution of Man
 on this globe. But these two volumes had to serve as a <strong>P</strong>ROLOGUE,
 and prepare the reader's mind for those which shall now follow.
 In treating of Cosmogony and then of the Anthropogenesis of mankind,
 it was necessary to show that no religion, since the very earliest,
 has ever been entirely based on fiction, as none was the object
 of special revelation; and that it is dogma alone which has ever
 been killing primeval truth. Finally, that no human-born doctrine,
 no creed, however sanctified by custom and antiquity, can compare
 in sacredness with the religion of Nature. The Key of Wisdom that
 unlocks the massive gates leading to the arcana of the innermost
 sanctuaries can be found hidden in her bosom only: and that bosom
 is in the countries pointed to by the great seer of the past century
 Emanuel Swedenborg. There lies the heart of nature, that shrine
 whence issued the early races of primeval Humanity, and which
 is the cradle of <i>physical </i>man.
 </p><p>
 Thus far have proceeded the rough outlines of the beliefs and
 tenets of the archaic, earliest Races contained in their hitherto
 secret Scriptural records. But our explanations are by no means
 complete, nor do they pretend to give out the full text, or to
 have been read by the help of more than three or four keys out
 of the sevenfold bunch of esoteric interpretation, and even this
 has only been partially accomplished. The work is too gigantic
 for any one person to undertake, far more to accomplish. Our main
 concern was simply to prepare the soil. This, we trust we have
 done. These two volumes only constitute the work of a pioneer
 who has forced his way into the well-nigh impenetrable jungle
 of the virgin forests of the Land of the Occult. A commencement
 has been made to fell and uproot the deadly upas trees of superstition,
 prejudice, and conceited ignorance, so that these two</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 798 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 volumes should form for the student a fitting prelude for Volumes
 <strong>III</strong>. and <strong>IV</strong>. Until the rubbish
 of the ages is cleared away from the minds of the Theosophists
 to whom these volumes are dedicated, it is impossible that the
 more practical teaching contained in the Third Volume should be
 understood. Consequently, it entirely depends upon the reception
 with which Volumes <strong>I.</strong> and <strong>II</strong>.
 will meet at the hands of Theosophists and Mystics, whether these
 last two volumes will ever be published, though they are <i>almost
 </i>completed.
 </p><blockquote>
 <i>Satyat Nasti paro dharmah.</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 THERE IS NO RELIGION HIGHER THAN TRUTH.
 </p><p>
 End of Vol. <strong>II</strong>.
 </p><p>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> of Volume 2
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm">Contents</a> of Volume 1
 </p><p>
 <a href="index.htm">Homepage</a> 
 </p></body>