<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 760 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[This page continued from <a href="sd2-3-07.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><p>
 <b>A</b>.
 </p><p>
 <b>S</b>OME <b>S</b>TATEMENTS <b>A</b>BOUT THE <b>S</b>ACRED <b>I</b>SLANDS
 AND <b>C</b>ONTINENTS
 </p><p>
 IN THE <b>C</b>LASSICS, <b>E</b>XPLAINED <b>E</b>SOTERICALLY.
 </p><p>
 All that which precedes was known to Plato, and to many others.
 But as no Initiate had the right to divulge and declare all he
 knew, posterity got only hints. Aiming more to instruct as a moralist
 than as a geographer and ethnologist or historian, the Greek philosopher
 merged the history of Atlantis, which covered several million
 years, into one</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 761 WHO, OR WHAT WILL BE DENIED NEXT?</h6>
 
 <p>
 event which he located on one comparatively small island 3000
 stadia long by 2000 wide; (or about 350 miles by 200, which is
 about the size of Ireland), whereas the priests spoke of Atlantis
 as a continent vast as "all Asia and Lybia" put together.
 But, however altered in its general aspect, Plato's narrative
 bears the impress of truth upon it.* It was not he who invented
 it, at any rate, since Homer, who preceded him by many centuries,
 also speaks of the Atlantes (who are our Atlanteans) and of their
 island in his Odyssey. Therefore the tradition was older than
 the bard of Ulysses. The Atlantes and the Atlantides of mythology
 are based upon the Atlantes and the Atlantides of history. Both
 Sanchoniathon and Diodorus have preserved the histories of those
 heroes and heroines, however much these accounts may have become
 mixed up with the mythical element.
 </p><p>
 In our own day we witness the stupendous fact that such comparatively
 recent personages as Shakespeare and William Tell are all but
 denied, an attempt being made to show one to be a <i>nom de plume,
 </i>and the other a person who never existed. What wonder then,
 that the two powerful races -- the Lemurians and the Atlanteans
 -- have been merged into and identified, in time, with a few half
 mythical peoples, who all bore the same patronymic?
 </p><p>
 Herodotus speaks of the <i>Atlantes -- </i>a people of Western
 Africa which gave its name to Mount Atlas; who were vegetarians,
 and "whose sleep was never disturbed by dreams"; and
 who, moreover, "daily cursed the sun at his rising and at
 his setting because his excessive heat scorched and tormented
 them."
 </p><p>
 These statements are based upon moral and psychic facts and not
 on physiological disturbance. The story of Atlas (<i>Vide supra</i>)<i>
 </i>gives the key to it. If the Atlanteans never had their sleep
 disturbed by dreams, it is because that particular tradition is
 concerned with the earliest Atlanteans, whose physical frame and
 brain were not yet sufficiently consolidated, in the physiological
 sense, to permit the nervous centres to act during sleep. With
 regard to that other statement -- namely, that
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Plato's veracity has been so unwarrantably impeached by even
 such friendly critics as Professor Jowett, when the "story
 of Atlantis" is discussed, that it seems well to cite the
 testimony of a specialist on the subject. It is sufficient to
 place mere literary cavillers in a very ridiculous position: --
 </p><p>
 "If our knowledge of Atlantis was more thorough, it would
 no doubt appear that in every instance wherein the people of Europe
 accord with the people of America, they were both in accord with
 the people of Atlantis. . . . . It will be seen that <i>in every</i>
 <i>case where Plato gives us information in this respect as to
 Atlantis,</i> <i>we find this agreement to exist. </i>It existed
 in <i>architecture, sculpture, navigation, engraving, writing,
 </i>an <i>established priesthood, </i>the<i> mode of worship,
 agriculture, </i>and the <i>construction of roads and canals</i>;<i>
 </i>and it is reasonable to suppose that the same correspondence
 extended down to all the minor details." (Donnelly, "Atlantis,"
 p. 194.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 762 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 they daily "cursed the Sun" -- this again has nothing
 to do with the heat, but with the moral degeneration that grew
 with the race. It is explained in our Commentaries. "They
 (the sixth sub-race of the Atlanteans) used magic incantations
 even against the Sun" -- failing in which, they cursed it.
 The sorcerers of Thessaly were credited with the power of calling
 down the moon, as Greek history assures us. The Atlanteans of
 the later period were renowned for their magic powers and wickedness,
 their ambition and defiance of the gods. Thence the same traditions
 taking form in the Bible about the antediluvian giants and the
 Tower of Babel, found also in the "Book of Enoch."
 </p><p>
 Diodorus records another fact or two: the Atlanteans boasted of
 possessing the land in which all the gods had received their birth;
 as also of having had Uranus for their first King, he being also
 the first to teach them astronomy. Very little more than this
 has come down to us from Antiquity.
 </p><p>
 The myth of Atlas is an allegory easily understood. Atlas is the
 old continents of Lemuria and Atlantis, combined and personified
 in one symbol. The poets attribute to Atlas, as to Proteus, a
 superior wisdom and an universal knowledge, and especially <i>a
 thorough acquaintance with the depths of the ocean</i>:<i> </i>because
 both continents bore races instructed by <i>divine </i>masters,
 and because both were transferred to the bottom of the seas, where
 they now slumber until their next reappearance above the waters.
 Atlas is the son of an ocean nymph, and his daughter is Calypso
 -- "the watery deep," (<i>See Hesiod</i>'<i>s Theogony,
 </i>507-509,<i> and Odyssey </i>1,<i> </i>51): Atlantis has been
 submerged beneath the waters of the ocean, and its progeny is
 now sleeping its eternal sleep on the ocean floors. The <i>Odyssey
 </i>makes of him the guardian and the "sustainer" of
 the huge pillars that separate the heavens from the earth (1,
 52-53)<i>. </i>He is their "supporter." And as both
 Lemuria, destroyed by submarine fires, and Atlantis, submerged
 by the waves, perished in the ocean deeps,* Atlas is said to have
 been compelled to leave the surface of the earth, and join his
 brother Iapetos in the depths of Tartarus. Sir Theodore Martin
 is right in interpreting this allegory as meaning, Atlas "standing
 on the solid floor of the inferior hemisphere of the universe
 and thus carrying at the same time the <i>disc </i>of the earth
 and the celestial vault -- the solid envelope of the superior
 hemisphere" . . .<i> </i>(<i>Memoires de l</i>'<i>Academie
 des</i> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Christians ought not to object to this doctrine of the periodical
 destruction of continents by fire and water; for St. Peter speaks
 of the earth "standing <i>out of the water,</i> and <i>in
 the water,</i> which earth, being <i>overflowed, perished,</i>
 but<i> is now reserved unto fire</i>";<i> </i>(<i>See also
 the </i>"<i>Lives of Alchemystical Philosophers,</i>"<i>
 p. </i>4<i>, London, </i>1815)<i>.</i> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]]763 THE HEIRLOOM OF ATLANTIS. </h6>
 
 <p>
 <i>Inscriptions, p. </i>176). For Atlas is Atlantis which supports
 the new continents and their horizons on its "shoulders."
 </p><p>
 Decharme, in his <i>Mythologie de la Grece Antique, </i>expresses
 a doubt as to the correctness of Pierron's translation of the
 Homeric word [[<i>echei</i>]] by <i>sustinet, </i>as it is not
 possible to see "how Atlas can support or bear at once several
 pillars situated in various localities." If Atlas were an
 individual it would be an awkward translation. But, as he personifies
 a continent in the west said to support heaven and earth at once
 (<i>AEschylus, </i>"<i>Prometheus Vinctus,</i>"<i> </i>351,
 429, <i>etc.</i>)<i> -- i.e.</i>, the feet of the giant tread
 the earth while his shoulders support the celestial vault, an
 allusion to the gigantic peaks of the Lemurian and Atlantean continents
 -- the epithet "supporter" becomes very correct. The
 term "conservator" for the Greek word [[<i>echei</i>]],
 which Decharme, following Sir Theodore Martin, understands as
 meaning [[<i>phulassei</i>]] and [[<i>epimeleitai</i>]], does
 not render the same sense.
 </p><p>
 The conception was certainly due to the gigantic mountain chain
 running along the terrestrial border (or disc). These mountain
 peaks plunged their roots into the very bottom of the seas, while
 they raised their heads heavenward, their summits being lost in
 the clouds. The ancient continents had more mountains than valleys
 on them. Atlas, and the Teneriffe Peak, now two of the dwarfed
 relics of the two lost continents, were thrice as lofty during
 the day of Lemuria and twice as high in that of Atlantis. Thus,
 the Lybians called Mount Atlas "the pillar of Heaven,"
 according to Herodotus (<i>IV</i>., 184), and Pindar qualified
 the later AEtna as "the celestial pillar" (<i>Pyth.
 </i>1, 20; <i>Decharme, </i>315). Atlas was an inaccessible island
 peak in the days of Lemuria, when the African continent had not
 yet been raised. It is the sole Western relic which survives,
 <i>independent, </i>of the continent on which the Third Race was
 born, developed and <i>fell</i>,* for Australia is now part of
 the Eastern continent. Proud Atlas, according to esoteric tradition,
 having sunk one third of its size into the waters, its two parts
 remained as an heirloom of Atlantis.
 </p><p>
 This again was known to the priests of Egypt and to Plato himself,
 the solemn oath of secrecy, which extended even to the mysteries
 of Neo-Platonism, alone preventing the whole truth from being
 told.** So
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This does not mean that Atlas is the locality where it fell,
 for this took place in Northern and Central Asia; but that Atlas
 formed part of the continent.
 </p><p>
 ** Had not Diocletian burned the esoteric works of the Egyptians
 in 296, together with their books on alchemy -- "[[<i>peri
 chumeias kai chrusou</i>]]"; Caesar 700,000 rolls at Alexandria,
 and Leo Isaurus 300,000 at Constantinople (<i>viiith cent.</i>);
 and the Mahomedans all they could lay their sacrilegious hands
 on -- the world might know to-day more of Atlantis than it does.
 For Alchemy had its birth-place in Atlantis during the Fourth
 Race, and had only its <i>renaissance </i>in Egypt.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 764 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 secret was the knowledge of the last islands of Atlantis, indeed,
 -- on account of the superhuman powers possessed by its inhabitants,
 the last direct descendants of the gods or divine Kings, as it
 was thought -- that to divulge its whereabouts and existence was
 punished by death. Theopompus says as much in his ever-suspected
 <i>Meropis, </i>when he speaks of the Phoenicians as being the
 only navigators in the seas which wash the Western coast of Africa;
 and who did it with such mystery that very often they sunk their
 own vessels to make the too inquisitive foreigners lose all trace
 of them.
 </p><p>
 There are those Orientalists and historians -- and they form the
 majority -- who, while feeling quite unmoved at the rather crude
 language of the Bible, and some of the events narrated in it,
 show great disgust at the<i> immorality </i>in the pantheons of
 India and Greece.* We may be told that before them Euripides,
 Pindar, and even Plato, express the same; that they too felt irritated
 with the tales invented --"those miserable stories of the
 poets," as Euripides expresses it ([[<i>haoidon hoide dustenoi
 logoi</i>]], <i>Hercules furens,</i> 1346<i>, Dindorf</i>'<i>s
 Edition</i>)<i>.</i> 
 </p><p>
 But there may have been another reason for this, perhaps. To those
 who knew that there was more than one key to theogonic symbolism,
 it was a mistake to have expressed it in a language so crude and
 misleading. For if the educated and learned philosopher could
 discern the kernel of wisdom under the coarse rind of the fruit,
 and knew that the latter concealed the greatest laws and truths
 of psychic and physical nature, as well as the origin of all things
 -- not so with the uninitiated profane. For him the dead letter
 was <i>religion</i>;<i> </i>the interpretation -- sacrilege. And
 this dead letter could neither edify nor make him more perfect,
 seeing that such an example was given him by his gods. But
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Professor Max Muller's Lectures -- "on the Philosophy of
 Mythology" -- are before us. We read his citations of Herakleitos
 (460 <strong>B.C</strong>.), declaring that Homer deserved "to
 be ejected from public assemblies and flogged;" and of Xenophanes
 "holding Homer and Hesiod responsible for the popular superstitions
 of Greece. . . . " and for ascribing "to the gods whatever
 is disgraceful and scandalous among men . . . unlawful acts, such
 as theft, adultery, and fraud." Finally the Oxford Professor
 quotes from Professor Jowett's translation of Plato, where the
 latter tells Adaimantos (Republic) that "the young man (in
 the State) should not be told that in committing the worst of
 crimes, he is far from doing anything outrageous, and that he
 may chastise his father (as Zeus did with Kronos) . . in any manner
 that he likes, and in this will only be following the example
 of the first and greatest of the gods. . . In my opinion, these
 stories are <i>not fit to be repeated.</i>"<i> </i>To this
 Dr. Max Muller observes that "the Greek religion was clearly
 a national and <i>traditional </i>religion, and, as such, it shared
 both the advantages and disadvantages <i>of this form</i> <i>of
 religious</i> <i>belief</i>";<i> </i>while the Christian
 religion is "an <i>historical </i>and, to a great extent,
 an individual religion, and it possesses the advantage of an authorised
 codex and of a settled system of faith" (p. 349). So much
 the worse if it is "historical," for surely Lot's incident
 with his daughters would only gain, were it "allegorical."
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 765 THE GOD-BEARING LAND. </h6>
 
 <p>
 to the philosopher -- especially the Initiate -- Hesiod's theogony
 is as <i>historical </i>as any history can be. Plato accepts it
 as such, and gives out as much of its truths as his pledges permitted
 him.
 </p><p>
 The fact that the Atlantes claimed Uranos for their first king,
 and that Plato commences his story of Atlantis by the division
 of the great continent by Neptune, the grandson of Uranos, shows
 that there were continents and kings before Atlantis. For Neptune,
 to whose lot that continent fell, finds on a small island only
 one human couple made of clay (<i>i.e.</i>, the first physical
 <i>human </i>man, whose origin began with the last sub-races of
 the Third Root-Race). It is their daughter Clito that the god
 marries, and it is his eldest son <i>Atlas </i>who receives for
 his part the mountain and the continent which was called by his
 name.
 </p><p>
 Now all the gods of Olympus, as well as those of the Hindu Pantheon
 and the Rishis, were the septiform personations (1) of the <i>noumena
 </i>of<i> </i>the intelligent Powers of nature; (2) of Cosmic
 Forces; (3) of celestial bodies; (4) of gods or Dhyan Chohans;
 (5) of psychic and spiritual powers; (6) of divine kings on earth
 (or the incarnations of the gods); and (7) of terrestrial heroes
 or men. The knowledge how to discern among these seven forms the
 one that is meant, belonged at all times to the Initiates, whose
 earliest predecessors had created this symbolical and allegorical
 system.
 </p><p>
 Thus while Uranos (or the host representing this celestial group)
 reigned and ruled over the Second Race and their (then) Continent;
 Kronos or Saturn governed the Lemurians; and Jupiter, Neptune*
 and others fought in the allegory for Atlantis, which was the
 whole earth in the day of the Fourth Race. Poseidonis, or the
 (last) island of Atlantis "the third step of Idaspati"
 (or Vishnu) in the mystic language of the secret books -- lasted
 till about 12,000 years ago.** The Atlantes of Diodorus were right
 in claiming that it was their country, the region surrounding
 Mount Atlas, where "the gods were born" -- <i>i.e.</i>,
 "incarnated." But it was after their fourth incarnation
 that they became, for the first time, human Kings and rulers.
 </p><p>
 Diodorus speaks of Uranos as the first king of Atlantis, confusing,
 either consciously or otherwise, the continents; but, as shown,
 Plato indirectly corrects the statement. The first astronomical
 teacher of men was Uranos, because he is one of the seven Dhyan
 Chohans of that second period or Race. Thus also in the second
 Manvantara
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Neptune or Poseidon is the Hindu Idaspati, identical with Narayana
 (the mover on the waters) or Vishnu, and like this Hindu god he
 is shown crossing the whole horizon <i>in three </i>steps. Idaspati
 means also "the master of the waters."
 </p><p>
 ** Bailly's assertion that the 9,000 years mentioned by the Egyptian
 priests do not represent "solar years" is groundless.
 Bailly knew nothing of geology and its calculations; otherwise
 he would have spoken differently.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 766 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (that of Swarochisha), among the seven sons of the Manu, the presiding
 gods or Rishis of that race, we find <i>Jyotis,* </i>the teacher
 of astronomy (Jyotisha), one of the names of Brahma. And thus
 also the Chinese revere <i>Tien</i> (or the sky, Ouranos), and
 name him as their first teacher of astronomy. Uranos gave birth
 to the Titans of the Third Race, and it is they who (personified
 by Saturn-Kronos) mutilated him. For as it is the Titans who <i>fell
 into generation, </i>when "creation <i>by will </i>was superseded
 by physical procreation," they needed Uranos no more.
 </p><p>
 And here a short digression must be permitted and pardoned. In
 consequence of the last scholarly production of Mr. Gladstone
 in the <i>Nineteenth Century, </i>"The Greater Gods of Olympos,"
 the ideas of the general public about Greek Mythology have been
 still further perverted and biassed. Homer is credited with an
 inner thought, which is regarded by Mr. Gladstone as "the
 true key to the Homeric conception," whereas this "key"
 was merely a <i>blind</i>. Poseidon "is indeed essentially
 of the earth earthy . . . . strong and self-asserting, sensual
 and intensely jealous and vindictive," -- but this is because
 he symbolises the Spirit of the Fourth Root-Race, the ruler of
 the Seas, that race which lives above the surface of the seas
 ([[<i>limne</i>]], Il. xxiv., 79), which is composed of the giants,
 the children of Eurymedon, the race which is the father of Polyphemus,
 the Titan and <i>one-eyed </i>Cyclops. Though Zeus reigns over
 the Fourth Race, it is Poseidon who rules, and who is the true
 key to the triad of the Kronid Brothers and to our <i>human </i>races.
 Poseidon and Nereus <i>are one</i>:<i> </i>the former the ruler
 or spirit of Atlantis before the beginning of its submersion,
 the latter, after. Neptune is the titanic strength of the <i>living
 </i>race; Nereus, its spirit reincarnated in the subsequent Fifth
 or Aryan Race: and this is what the great Greek scholar of England
 has not yet discovered, or even dimly perceived. And yet he makes
 many observations upon the "artfulness" of Homer, who
 never names Nereus, at whose designation we arrive . . . . only
 through the patronymic of the Nereids!
 </p><p>
 Thus the tendency of even the most erudite Hellenists is to confine
 their speculations to the exoteric images of mythology and to
 lose sight of their inner meaning: and it is remarkably illustrated
 in the case of the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, as we have shown.
 While almost the most conspicuous figure of our age as a statesman,
 he is at the same time one of the most cultured scholars England
 has given birth to. Grecian literature has been the loving study
 of his life, and he has found time amid the bustle of public affairs
 to enrich contemporary literature with contributions to Greek
 scholarship which will make his name famous through coming generations.
 At the same time, as his sincere
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See<i> Matsya Purana, </i>which places him among the seven Prajapatis
 of the period.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 767 THE POWER OF NAMES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 admirer, the present writer cannot but feel a deep regret that
 posterity, while acknowledging his profound erudition and splendid
 culture, will yet, in the greater light which <i>must </i>then
 shine upon the whole question of symbolism and mythology, judge
 that he has failed to grasp the spirit of the religious system
 which he has often criticised from the dogmatic Christian standpoint.
 In that future day it will be perceived that the esoteric key
 to the mysteries of the Christian as well as of the Grecian theogonies
 and Sciences, is the <i>Secret Doctrine </i>of the pre-historic
 nations, which, along with others, he has denied. It is that Doctrine
 alone which can trace the kinship of all human religious speculations
 or even so-called<i> Revelations, </i>and it is this teaching
 which infuses the Spirit of life into the lay figures on the Mounts
 of Meru, Olympus, Walhalla, or Sinai. If Mr. Gladstone were a
 younger man, his admirers might hope that his scholastic studies
 would be crowned by the discovery of this underlying truth. As
 it is, he but wastes the golden hours of his declining years in
 futile disputations with that giant free-thinker, Col. Ingersoll,
 each fighting with the weapons of exoteric temper, drawn from
 the arsenals of <i>ignorant<b> </b></i><strong>L</strong>ITERALISM.
 These two great controversialists are equally blind to the true
 esoteric meaning of the texts which they hurl at each other's
 head like iron bullets, while the world alone suffers by such
 controversies: since the one helps to strengthen the ranks of
 materialism, and the other those of blind Sectarianism and of
 the dead letter. And now we may return once more to our immediate
 subject.
 </p><p>
 Many a time Atlantis is spoken of under another name, one unknown
 to our commentators. The <i>power of names </i>is great, and was
 known since the first men were instructed by the <i>divine</i>
 masters. And as Solon had studied it, he translated the "Atlantean"
 names into names devised by himself. In connection with the continent
 of Atlantis, it is desirable to bear in mind that the accounts
 which have come down to us from the old Greek writers contain
 a confusion of statements, some referring to the Great Continent
 and others to the last small island of Poseidonis. It has become
 customary to take them all as referring to the latter only, but
 that this is incorrect is evident from the incompatibility of
 the various statements as to the size, etc., of "Atlantis."
 </p><p>
 Thus, in the Timaeus and Critias, Plato says, that the plain surrounding
 the city was itself surrounded by mountain chains. . . . . And
 the plain was smooth and level, and of an oblong shape, lying
 north and south, three thousand stadia in one direction and two
 thousand in the other. . . . . They surrounded the plain by an
 enormous canal or dike, 101 feet deep, 606 feet broad, and 1,250
 miles in length.
 </p><p>
 Now in other places the entire size of the <i>island </i>of Poseidonis
 is given as about the same as that assigned here to the "<i>plain</i>
 around the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 768 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 city" alone. Obviously, one set of statements refers to the
 great continent, and the other to its last remnant -- Plato's
 island.
 </p><p>
 And, again, the standing army of Atlantis is given as upwards
 of a million men; its navy as 1,200 ships and 240,000 men. Such
 statements are quite inapplicable to a small island state, of
 about the size of Ireland!
 </p><p>
 The Greek allegories give to Atlas, or Atlantis, seven daughters
 (seven sub-races), whose respective names are Maia, Electra, Taygeta,
 Asterope, Merope, Alcyone, and Celaeno. This ethnologically, as
 they are credited with having married gods and with having become
 the mothers of famous heroes, the founders of many nations and
 cities. Astronomically, the Atlantides have become the seven Pleiades
 (?). In occult science the two are connected with the destinies
 of nations, those destinies being shaped by the past events of
 their early lives according to Karmic law.
 </p><p>
 Three great nations claimed in antiquity a direct descent from
 the kingdom of Saturn or Lemuria (confused already several thousands
 of years before our era with Atlantis): and these were the Egyptians,
 the Phoenicians (<i>Vide</i> Sanchoniathon), and the old Greeks
 (<i>Vide</i> Diodorus, after Plato). But the oldest civilized
 country of Asia -- India -- can be shown to claim the same descent
 likewise. Sub-races guided by Karmic law or destiny repeat unconsciously
 the first steps of their respective mother-races. As the comparatively
 fair Brahmins have come -- when invading India with its dark-coloured
 Dravidians -- from the North, so the Aryan Fifth Race must claim
 its origin from northern regions. The occult sciences show that
 the founders (the respective groups of the seven Prajapatis) of
 the Root Races have all been connected with the Pole Star. In
 the Commentary we find: --
 </p><p>
 "<i>He who understands the age of Dhruva* who measures 9090
 mortal years, will understand the times of the pralayas, the final
 destiny of nations, O Lanoo.</i>"
 </p><p>
 Moreover there must have been a good reason why an Asiatic nation
 should locate its great progenitors and saints in the <i>Ursa
 Major,</i> a<i> northern constellation. </i>It is 70,000 YEARS,
 HOWEVER, SINCE THE POLE OF THE EARTH POINTED TO THE FURTHER END
 OF URSA MINOR'S TAIL; and many more thousand years since the seven
 Rishis could have been identified with the constellation of Ursa
 Major.
 </p><p>
 The Aryan race was born and developed in the far north, though
 after the sinking of the continent of Atlantis its tribes emigrated
 further south into Asia. Hence Prometheus is son of Asia, and
 Deukalion, his son, the Greek Noah -- he who created men out of
 the stones of mother
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The equivalent of this name is given in the original.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 769 THE SONS OF COELUS AND TERRA. </h6>
 
 <p>
 earth -- is called a northern Scythe, by Lucian, and Prometheus
 is made the brother of Atlas and is tied down to Mount Caucasus
 amid the Snows.*
 </p><p>
 Greece had her <i>Hyperborean </i>as well as her <i>Southern </i>Apollo.
 Thus nearly all the gods of Egypt, Greece, and Phoenicia, as well
 as those of other Pantheons, are of a northern origin and originated
 in Lemuria, towards the close of the Third Race, after its full
 physical and physiological evolution had been completed.** All
 the "fables" of Greece were built on historical facts,
 if that history had only passed unadulterated by myths to posterity.
 The "one-eyed" Cyclopes, the giants fabled as the sons
 of <i>Coelus</i> and<i> Terra -- </i>three in number, according
 to Hesiod -- were the last three sub-races of the Lemurians, the
 "one-eye" referring to the Wisdom eye***; for the two
 front eyes were fully developed as physical organs only in the
 beginning of the Fourth Race. The allegory of Ulysses, whose companions
 were devoured while the king of Ithaca was saved by putting out
 with a fire-brand the eye of Polyphemus, is based upon the psycho-physiological
 atrophy of the "third" eye. Ulysses belongs to the cycle
 of the heroes of the Fourth Race, and, though a "sage"
 in the sight of the latter, must have been a profligate in the
 opinion of the pastoral Cyclopes.**** His adventure with the latter
 -- a savage gigantic race, the antithesis of cultured civilization
 in the Odyssey -- is an allegorical record of the gradual passage
 from the Cyclopean civilization of stone and colossal buildings
 to the more sensual and physical culture of the Atlanteans, which
 finally caused the last of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Deukalion is said to have brought the worship of Adonis and
 Osiris into Phoenicia. Now the worship is that of the Sun, lost
 and found again in its astronomical significance. It is only at
 the Pole where the Sun dies out for such a length of time as six
 months, for in latitude 68 [[degrees]] it remains <i>dead</i>
 only for forty days, as in the festival of Osiris. The two worships
 were born in the north of Lemuria, or on that continent of which
 Asia was a kind of broken prolongation, and which stretched up
 to the Polar regions. This is well shown by de Gebelin's "<i>Allegories
 d</i>'<i>Orient,</i>"<i> </i>p. 246, and by Bailly; though
 neither Hercules nor Osiris are <i>solar myths, </i>save in one
 of their seven aspects.
 </p><p>
 ** The Hyperboreans, now regarded as mythical, were described
 (<i>Herod, IV., </i>33-35; <i>Pausanias, </i>1<i>, </i>31, 2;
 V., 7, 8; <i>ad X., </i>5, 7, 8) as the beloved priests and servants
 of the gods, and of Apollo chiefly.
 </p><p>
 *** The Cyclopes are not the only "one-eyed" representatives
 in tradition. The Arimaspes were a Scythian people, and were also
 credited with but one eye. (<i>Geographie ancienne, Vol. II, p.
 </i>321.) It is they whom Apollo destroyed with his shafts. (<i>See
 supra.</i>)
 </p><p>
 **** Ulysses was wrecked on the isle of AEaea, where Circe changed
 all his companions into pigs for <i>their voluptuousness</i>;<i>
 </i>and after that he was thrown into Ogygia, the island of Calypso,
 where for some seven years he lived with the nymph in illicit
 connection (<i>Odyssey and elsewhere</i>)<i>. </i>Now Calypso
 was a daughter of <i>Atlas </i>(<i>Odys. Book XII.</i>)<i>, </i>and
 all the traditional ancient versions, when speaking of the Isle
 of Ogygia, say that it was very distant from Greece, and right
 in the middle of the ocean: thus identifying it with Atlantis.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 770 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Third Race to lose their all-penetrating <i>spiritual </i>eye.
 That other allegory, which makes Apollo kill the Cyclops to avenge
 the death of his son Asclepios, does not refer to the three races
 represented by the three sons of Heaven and Earth, but to the
 Hyperborean Arimaspian Cyclopes, the last of the race endowed
 with the "Wisdom-eye." The former have left relics of
 their buildings everywhere, in the south as much as in the north;
 the latter, were confined to the north solely. Thus Apollo --
 pre-eminently the god of the Seers, whose duty it is to punish
 desecration -- killed them -- his shafts representing human passions,
 fiery and lethal -- and hid his shaft behind a mountain in the
 Hyperborean regions. (<i>Hygin. </i>"<i>Astron. Poetique,</i>"<i>
 Book ii. c. </i>15)<i>. </i>Cosmically and astronomically this
 Hyperborean god is the Sun personified, which during the course
 of the sidereal year (25,868 y.) changes the climates on the earth's
 surface, making of tropical, frigid regions, and <i>vice versa.
 </i>Psychically and spiritually his significance is far more important.
 As Mr. Gladstone pertinently remarks in his "Greater Gods
 of Olympos," "the qualities of Apollo (jointly with
 Athene) are impossible to be accounted for without repairing to
 sources, which lie beyond the limit of the traditions most commonly
 explored for the elucidation of the Greek mythology" (<i>Nineteenth
 Century, </i>July, 1887.)
 </p><p>
 The history of Latona (Leto), Apollo's mother, is most pregnant
 in various meanings. Astronomically, Latona is the polar region
 and the night, giving birth to the Sun, Apollo, Phoebus, etc.
 She is born in the Hyperborean countries wherein all the inhabitants
 were priests of her son, celebrating his resurrection and descent
 to their country every nineteen years at the renewal of the lunar
 cycle (<i>Diod. Sic. II. </i>307). Latona is the Hyperborean Continent,
 and its race -- geologically.*
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * To make a difference between Lemuria and Atlantis, the ancient
 writers referred to the latter as the northern or Hyperborean
 Atlantis, and to the former as the southern. Thus Apollodorus
 says (<i>Mythology, Book II.</i>): "The golden apples carried
 away by Hercules are not, as some think, in Lybia; they are in
 the Hyperborean Atlantis." The Greeks naturalised all the
 gods they borrowed and made Hellenes of them, and the moderns
 helped them. Thus also the mythologists have tried to make of
 Eridan the river Po, in Italy. In the myth of Phaeton it is said
 that at his death his sisters dropped hot tears which fell into
 Eridan and were changed into amber! Now amber is found only in
 the northern seas, in the Baltic. Phaeton, meeting with his death
 while carrying heat to the frozen stars of the boreal regions,
 awakening at the Pole the Dragon made rigid by cold, and being
 hurled down into the Eridan, is an allegory referring directly
 to the changes of climate in those distant times when, from a
 frigid zone, the polar lands had become a country with a moderate
 and warm climate. The usurper of the functions of the sun, Phaeton,
 being hurled into the Eridan by Jupiter's thunderbolt, is an allusion
 to the second change that took place in those regions when, once
 more, the land where "the magnolia blossomed" became
 the desolate forbidding land of the farthest north and eternal
 ices. This allegory covers then the events of two <i>pralayas</i>;<i>
 </i>and if well understood ought to be a demonstration of the
 enormous antiquity of the human races.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 771 THE CHILDREN OF NIOBE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 When the astronomical meaning cedes its place to the spiritual
 and divine -- Apollo and Athene transforming themselves into the
 form of <i>birds, </i>the symbol and glyph of the higher divinities
 and angels -- then the bright god assumes divine creative powers.
 Apollo becomes the personification of Seership, when he sends
 the astral double of AEneas to the battle field (<strong>II.</strong>
 431-53), and has the gift of appearing to his Seers without being
 visible to other persons present -- (Iliad, xvii., 322-36) --
 a gift, however, shared by every high Adept.
 </p><p>
 The King of the Hyperboreans, was, therefore, the son of Boreas,
 the north-wind, and the High Priest of Apollo. The quarrel of
 Latona with Niobe (the Atlantean race) -- the mother of seven
 sons and seven daughters personifying the seven sub-races of the
 Fourth Race and their seven branches (see Apollodorus for this
 number) -- allegorizes the history of the two continents. The
 wrath of "the sons of god," or of "Will and Yoga,"
 at seeing the steady degradation of the Atlanteans was great (<i>See
 </i>"<i>The Sons of God and the Sacred Island</i>");<i>
 </i>and the destruction of the "children of Niobe" by
 the children of Latona -- Apollo and Diana, the deities of light,
 wisdom and purity, or the Sun and Moon astronomically, whose influence
 causes changes in the earth's axis, deluges and other cosmic cataclysms
 -- is thus very clear.* The fable about the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * So occult and mystic is one of the aspects of Latona that she
 is made to reappear even in <i>Revelation </i>(<i>xii.</i>)<i>
 </i>as the woman clothed with the Sun (Apollo) and the Moon (Diana)
 under her feet, who being with child "cries, travailing in
 birth, pained to be delivered." A great red Dragon, etc.,
 stands before the woman ready to devour the child. She brings
 forth the man child who was to rule all nations with a rod of
 iron, and who was caught unto the throne of God (the Sun). The
 woman fled to the wilderness still pursued by the Dragon, who
 flees again, and casts out of his mouth water as a flood, when
 the earth helped the woman and swallowed the flood; and the Dragon
 went to make war with the remnant of her seed who keep the commandment
 of God, etc. (<i>See xii., </i>1, 17.) Anyone, who reads the allegory
 of Latona pursued by the revenge of jealous Juno, will recognise
 the identity of the two versions. Juno sends Python, the Dragon,
 to persecute and destroy Latona and devour her babe. The latter
 is Apollo, the Sun, for "the man-child, who was to rule all
 nations with a rod of iron" of<i> Revelation, </i>is surely
 not the meek "Son of God," Jesus, but the physical Sun,
 "who rules all nations"; the Dragon being the North
 Pole, gradually chasing the early Lemurians from the lands which
 became more and more Hyperborean and unfit to be inhabited by
 those who were fast developing into physical men, for they now
 had to deal with the climatic variations. The Dragon will not
 allow Latona "to bring forth" -- (the Sun to appear).
 "She is driven from heaven, and finds no place where she
 can bring forth," until Neptune (the ocean), moved with pity,
 makes immovable the floating isle of Delos (the nymph Asteria,
 hitherto hiding from Jupiter under the waves of the ocean) on
 which Latona finds refuge and where the bright god [[<i>Delios</i>]]
 is born, the god, who no sooner appears than he kills Python,
 the cold and frost of the Arctic region, in whose deadly coils
 all life becomes extinct. In other words, Latona-Lemuria is transformed
 into Niobe-Atlantis, over which her son Apollo, or the Sun, reigns
 -- with an iron rod, truly, since Herodotus makes the Atlantes
 <i>curse </i>his too great heat. This allegory is reproduced in
 its other mystic meaning (another of the seven keys) in the [[Footnote
 continued on next page]]</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 772 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 never-ceasing tears of Niobe, whose grief causes Zeus to change
 her into a fountain -- Atlantis covered with water -- is no less
 graphic as a symbol. Niobe, let it be remembered, is the daughter
 of one of the Pleiades (or Atlantides) the <i>grand-daughter </i>of
 Atlas therefore, (<i>See </i>"<i>Metamorphoses of Ovid,</i>"<i>
 Book VI.</i>)<i>, </i>because she represents the last generations
 of the doomed continent.
 </p><p>
 A true remark, that of Bailly, which says that Atlantis had an
 enormous influence on antiquity. "If these names," he
 adds, "are mere allegories, then all that those fables contain
 of truth comes from Atlantis; if the fable is a real tradition
 -- however altered -- then the whole of the ancient history is
 still in it." (<i>Lettres sur l</i>'<i>Atlantide, p. </i>137.)
 </p><p>
 So much so, that all ancient writings -- prose and poetry -- are
 full of the reminiscences of the Lemuro-Atlanteans, the first
 <i>physical </i>races, though the Third and the Fourth in number.
 Hesiod records the tradition about the men of the age of Bronze,
 whom Jupiter had made out of ash-wood and who had hearts harder
 than diamond. Clad in bronze from head to foot they passed their
 lives in fighting. Monstrous in size, endowed with a terrible
 strength, invincible arms and hands descended from their shoulders,
 says the poet (<i>Hesiod, in oper. and dieb. v</i>. 143). Such
 were the giants of the first physical races. The Iranians have
 a reference to the later Atlanteans in Yasna ix. 15. Tradition
 maintains that the "Sons of God," or the great Initiates
 of the Sacred Island, took advantage of the Deluge, to rid the
 earth of all the Sorcerers among the Atlanteans. The said verse
 addresses Zoroaster as one of the "Sons of God." --
 It says: "Thou, O Zarathustra, didst make all demons (<i>i.e.</i>,
 Sorcerers), who before roamed the world in human forms, conceal
 themselves in the earth" (<i>i.e.</i>, helped them to get
 submerged).
 </p><p>
 The Lemurians, as also the early Atlanteans, were divided into
 two distinct classes -- the "Sons of Night" or Darkness,
 and the "Sons of the Sun," or Light. The old books tell
 us of terrible battles between the two, when the former, leaving
 their land of Darkness, from whence the Sun departed for long
 months, descended from their inhospitable regions and "tried
 to wrench the lord of light" from their better favoured brothers
 of the equatorial regions. We may be told that the ancients knew
 nothing of the long night of six months' duration in the Polar
 regions. Even Herodotus, more learned
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] chapter just cited of
 the <i>Apocalypse. </i>Latona became a powerful goddess indeed,
 and saw her son receive worship (solar worship) in almost every
 fane of antiquity. In his occult aspect Apollo is patron of Number
 7. He is born on the seventh of the month, and the swans of Myorica
 swim seven times around Delos singing that event; he is given
 seven chords to his Lyre -- the seven rays of the sun and the
 seven forces of nature. But this only in the astronomical meaning,
 whereas the above is purely geological.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 773 THE CYCLES OF TIME.</h6>
 
 <p>
 than the rest, only mentions a people who <i>slept </i>for six
 months in the year, and remained awake the other half. Yet the
 Greeks knew well that there was a country in the north where the
 year was divided into a day and night of six months' duration
 each, for Pliny says so in his Fourth Book, c. 12. They speak
 of the Cimmerians and of the Hyperboreans, and draw a distinction
 between the two. The former inhabited the <i>Palus Maeotis </i>(between
 45 [[degrees]] and 50 [[degrees]] latitude). Plutarch explains
 that they were <i>but a small portion of a great nation </i>driven
 away by the Scythians, which nation stopped near Tanais, <i>having
 crossed Asia. </i>"These warlike multitudes lived formerly
 on the ocean shores, in dense forests, and <i>under a tenebrous
 sky. </i>There the pole is almost touching the head, there <i>long
 nights and days divide the year</i>"<i> </i>(<i>in Mario</i>)<i>.
 </i>As to the Hyperboreans, these peoples, as expressed by Solinus
 Polyhistor (<i>c</i>. 16), "sow in the morning, reap at noon,
 gather their fruits in the evening, and store them during the
 night in their caves."
 </p><p>
 Even the writers of the <i>Zohar </i>knew of the fact (as shown
 in iii., fol. 10<i>a</i>), as it is written: "In the Book
 of Hammannunah, the Old, we learn . . . . there are some countries
 of the earth which are lightened, whilst others are in darkness;
 these have the day, when for the former it is night; and <i>there
 are countries in which </i>it is constantly day, or in which at
 least the night continues only some instants." (Isaac Myer's
 "<i>Qabbalah,</i>"<i> </i>p. 139).
 </p><p>
 The island of <i>Delos, </i>the Asteria of the Greek mythology,
 was never in Greece, a country which, in its day, was not yet
 in existence, not even in its molecular form. Several writers
 have shown that it represented a country or an island, far larger
 than the small dots of land which became Greece. Both Pliny and
 Diodorus Siculus place it in the Northern seas. One calls it <i>Basilea
 </i>or "royal" (<i>Vol. II., p. </i>225<i> of Diod.</i>);<i>
 </i>the other, Pliny, names it <i>Osericta </i>(<i>Book xxxvii,
 c. </i>2)<i>, </i>a word, according to Rudbeck (<i>Vol. I., p.
 </i>462-464), having had "a significance in the northern
 languages, equivalent to the Island of the <i>divine </i>Kings
 or god-Kings," or again the "royal island of the gods,"
 because the gods were born there, <i>i.e.</i>, the divine dynasties
 of the kings of Atlantis proceeded from that place. Let geographers
 and geologists seek for it among that group of islands discovered
 by Nordenskiold on his <i>Vega </i>voyage in the arctic regions.*
 The secret books inform us that <i>the climate has changed in
 those regions more than once </i>since the first men inhabited
 those now almost inaccessible latitudes. They were a paradise
 before they became hell;
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * These islands were "found strewn with fossils of horses,
 sheep, oxen, etc., among gigantic bones of elephants, mammoths,
 rhinoceroses," etc. If there was no man on earth at that
 period "how came horses and sheep to be found in company
 with the huge antediluvians?" asks a master in a letter.
 ("<i>Esoteric Buddhism,</i>"<i> </i>67). The reply is
 given above in the text.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 774 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the dark Hades of the Greeks and the cold realm of Shades where
 the Scandinavian Hel, the goddess-Queen of the country of the
 dead, "holds sway deep down in Helheim and Niflheim."
 Yet, it was the birth-place of Apollo, who was the brightest of
 gods, in heaven -- astronomically -- as he was the most enlightened
 of the divine kings who ruled over the early nations, in his human
 meaning. The latter fact is borne out in the <i>Iliad IV., </i>239-62<i>,
 Vide </i>"The Greater gods" -- wherein Apollo is said
 to have appeared four times in his own form (as the god of the
 four races) and six times in human form, <i>i.e.</i>, as connected
 with the divine Dynasties of the earlier unseparated Lemurians.
 </p><p>
 It is those early mysterious peoples, their countries (which have
 now become uninhabitable), as well as the name given to man both
 dead and alive, which have furnished an opportunity to the ignorant
 Church fathers for inventing a hell, which they have transformed
 into a burning instead of a freezing locality.*
 </p><p>
 It is, of course, evident that it is neither the Hyperboreans,
 nor the Cimmerians, the Arimaspes, nor even the Scyths -- known
 to and communicating with the Greeks -- who were our Atlanteans.
 But they were all the descendants of their last sub-races. The
 Pelasgians were certainly one of the root-races of future Greece,
 and were a remnant of a sub-race of Atlantis. Plato hints as much
 in speaking of the latter, whose name it is averred came from
 <i>pelagus, </i>the great sea. Noah's Deluge is astronomical and
 allegorical, but it is not mythical, for the story is based upon
 the same archaic tradition of men -- or rather of nations -- which
 were saved during the cataclysms, in canoes, arks, and ships.
 No one would presume to say that the Chaldean Xisuthrus, the Hindu
 Vaivasvata, the Chinese Peirun -- the "beloved of the gods,"
 who rescued him from the flood in a canoe -- or the Swedish Belgamer,
 for whom the gods did the same in the north, are all identical
 as a personage. But their legends have all sprung from the catastrophe
 which involved both the continent and the island of Atlantis.
 </p><p>
 The allegory about the antediluvian giants and their achievements
 in Sorcery is no myth. Biblical events <i>are </i>revealed indeed.
 But it is neither by the voice of God amid thunder and lightning
 on Mount
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * A good proof that all the gods, and religious beliefs, and myths
 have come from the north, which was also the cradle of <i>physical
 </i>man, lies in several suggestive words which have originated
 and remain to this day among the northern tribes in their primeval
 significance; but although there was a time when all the nations
 were "of one lip," these words have received a different
 meaning with the Greeks and Latins. One such word is <i>Mann,
 Man, </i>a living being, and <i>Manes, </i>dead men. The Laplanders
 call their corpses to this day <i>manee, </i>(<i>Voyage de Renard
 en Laponie </i>I., 184). Mannus is the ancestor of the German
 race; the Hindu Manu, the thinking being, from man; the Egyptian
 <i>Menes</i>;<i> </i>and<i> Minos, </i>the King of Crete, judge
 of the infernal regions after his death -- all proceed from the
 same root or word.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 775 WHO WERE THE NEPHILIM? </h6>
 
 <p>
 Sinai, nor by a divine finger tracing the record on tablets of
 stone, but simply through tradition <i>via</i> pagan sources.
 It was not surely the Pentateuch that Diodorus was repeating when
 he wrote upon the Titans -- the giants born of Heaven and Earth,
 or, rather, born of the Sons of God who took to themselves for
 wives the daughters of men who were fair. Nor was Pherecydes quoting
 from Genesis when giving details on those giants which are not
 to be found in the Jewish Scriptures. He says that the Hyperboreans
 were of the race of the Titans, which race descended from the
 earliest giants, and that it was that Hyperborean region which
 was the birth-place of the first giants. The Commentaries on the
 sacred books explain that the said region was the far north, the
 polar lands now, the pre-Lemurian earliest continent, embracing
 once upon a time the present Greenland, Spitzbergen, Sweden, Norway,
 etc.
 </p><p>
 But who were the <i>Nephilim </i>of Genesis vi. 4? There were
 Palaeolithic and Neolithic men in Palestine ages before the events
 recorded in the book of the Beginnings. The theological tradition
 identifies these Nephilim with hairy men or Satyrs, the latter
 being mythical in the Fifth Race and the former historical in
 both the Fourth and Fifth Races. We have stated elsewhere what
 the prototypes of these Satyrs were, and have spoken of the bestiality
 of the early and later Atlantean race. What is the meaning of
 Poseidon's amours under such a variety of <i>animal </i>forms?
 He became a dolphin to win Amphitrite; a horse, to seduce Ceres;
 a ram, to deceive Theophane, etc., etc. Poseidon is not only the
 personation of the Spirit and Race of Atlantis, but also of the
 vices of these giants. Gesenius and others devote an enormous
 space to the meaning of the word <i>Nephilim </i>and explain very
 little. But Esoteric records show these hairy creatures to be
 the last descendants of those Lemuro-Atlantean races, which begot
 children on female animals, of species now long extinct; thus
 producing <i>dumb</i> men, "monsters," as the Stanzas
 have it.
 </p><p>
 Now mythology, built upon Hesiod's Theogony, which is but a poetised
 record of actual traditions, or oral history, speaks of three
 giants, called Briareus, Kottos, and Gyges, living in a dark country
 where they were imprisoned by Kronos for their rebellion against
 him. All the three are endowed by myth with an hundred arms and
 fifty heads, the latter standing for races, the former for sub-races
 and tribes. Bearing in mind that in mythology every personage
 almost is a god or derni-god, and also a king or simple mortal
 in his second aspect;* and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Thus, for instance, Gyges is a hundred-armed and fifty-headed
 monster, a demi-god in one case, and a Lydian, the successor of
 Candaules, king of the country, in another version. The same is
 found in the Indian Pantheon, where Rishis and the Sons of Brahma
 are reborn as mortals.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 776 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 that both stand as symbols for lands, islands, powers of nature,
 elements, nations, races and sub-races, the esoteric Commentary
 will become comprehensible. It says that the three giants are
 three polar lands which have changed form several times, at each
 new cataclysm, or disappearance of one continent to make room
 for another. The whole globe is convulsed periodically; and has
 been so convulsed, since the appearance of the First Race, four
 times. Yet, though the whole face of the earth was transformed
 thereby each time, the conformation of the arctic and antarctic
 poles has but little altered. The polar lands unite and break
 off from each other into islands and peninsulas, yet remain ever
 the same. Therefore northern Asia is called the "eternal
 or perpetual land," and the Antarctic the "ever living"
 and "the concealed"; while the Mediterranean, Atlantic,
 Pacific and other regions disappear and reappear in turn, into
 and above the great waters.
 </p><p>
 From the first appearance of the great continent of Lemuria, the
 three polar giants had been imprisoned in their circle by Kronos.
 Their gaol is surrounded by a wall of bronze, and the exit is
 through gates fabricated by Poseidon (or Neptune, hence by the
 seas), which they cannot cross; and it is in that damp region,
 where eternal darkness reigns, that the three brothers languish.
 The Iliad (viii., 13) makes of it the Tartaros. When the gods
 and Titans rebelled in their turn against Zeus -- the deity of
 the Fourth Race -- the father of the gods bethought himself of
 the imprisoned giants in order to conquer the gods and Titans,
 and to precipitate the latter into Hades; or, in clearer words,
 to have Lemuria hurled amid thunder and lightning to the bottom
 of the seas, so as to make room for Atlantis, which was to be
 submerged and perish in its turn.* The geological upheaval and
 deluge of Thessaly was a repetition on a small scale of the great
 cataclysm; and, remaining impressed on the memory of the Greeks,
 was merged by them into, and confused with, the general fate of
 Atlantis. So, also, the war between the Rakshasas of Lanka and
 the Bharateans, the melee of the Atlanteans and Aryans in their
 supreme struggle, or the conflict between the Devs and Izeds (or
 Peris), became, ages later, the struggle of Titans, separated
 into two inimical camps, and still later the war between the angels
 of God and the angels of Satan. Historical facts became theological
 dogmas. Ambitious scholiasts, men of a small sub-race born but
 yesterday, and one of the latest issues of the Aryan stock, took
 upon themselves to overturn the religious
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The continents perish in turn by <i>fire</i> and <i>water</i>:
 either through earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, or by sinking
 and the great displacement of waters. Our continents have to perish
 owing to the former cataclysmal process. The incessant earthquakes
 of this and the past years may be a warning.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 777 MYTHOLOGY BUILT ON HISTORY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 thought of the world, and succeeded. For nearly two thousand years
 they impressed thinking Humanity with the belief in the existence
 of Satan.
 </p><p>
 But as it is now the conviction of more than one Greek scholar
 -- as it was that of Bailly and Voltaire -- that Hesiod's theogony
 was based upon historical facts (<i>see Decharme</i>'<i>s Mythol.
 de la Grece Antique</i>)<i>,</i> it<i> </i>becomes easier for
 the occult teachings to find their way into the minds of thoughtful
 men, and therefore are these passages from mythology brought forward
 in our discussion upon modern learning in this <i>Addendum.</i>
 
 </p><p>
 Such symbolisms as are found in all the exoteric creeds, are so
 many landmarks of prehistoric truths. The sunny, happy land, the
 primitive cradle of the earliest human races, has become several
 times since then hyperborean and Saturnine*; thus showing the
 Golden Age and reign of Saturn from multiform aspects. It was
 many-sided in its character indeed -- climatically, ethnologically
 and morally. For, the Third, Lemurian Race must be physiologically
 divided into the early androgynous and the later bi-sexual race;
 and the climate of its dwelling places and continents into that
 of an eternal spring and eternal winter, into life and death,
 purity and impurity. The Cycle of legends is ever being transformed
 on its journey by popular fancy. Yet it may be cleansed from the
 dross it has picked up on its way through many nations and through
 the countless minds which have added their own exuberant additions
 to the original facts. Leaving for a while the Greek interpretations
 we may seek for some more corroborations of the latter in the
 scientific and geological proofs.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Denis, the geographer, tells us that the great sea North of
 Asia was called glacial, or<i> Saturnine </i>(<i>v.</i> 35). Orpheus
 (<i>v</i>. 1077) and Pliny (<i>Book IV., c.</i> 16) corroborate
 the statement by showing that it is its giant inhabitants who
 gave it the name. And the Secret Doctrine explains both assertions
 by telling us that all the continents were formed from North to
 South; and that as the sudden change of climate dwarfed the race
 that had been born on it, arresting its growth, so, several degrees
 southward, various conditions had always produced the tallest
 men in every new humanity, or race. We see it to this day. The
 tallest men now found are those in Northern countries, while the
 smallest are Southern Asiatics, Hindus, Chinamen, Japanese, etc.
 Compare the tall Sikhs and Punjabees, the Afghans, Norwegians,
 Russians, Northern Germans, Scotchmen, and the English, with the
 inhabitants of central India and the average European on the continent.
 Thus also the giants of Atlantis, and hence the Titans of Hesiod,
 are all Northerners.
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-3-09.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>