<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 180 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 STANZA VIII.<br>
 EVOLUTION OF THE ANIMAL MAMMALIANS. -- THE<br>
 FIRST FALL.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><blockquote>
 §§ (28) How the first mammals were produced. (29) A
 quasi-Darwinian Evolution. (30) The animals get solid bodies.
 (31) Their separation into sexes. (32) The first sin of the mindless
 men.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 ---------------------
 </p><p>
 28. <strong>F</strong>ROM THE DROPS OF SWEAT (a); FROM THE RESIDUE
 OF THE SUBSTANCE; MATTER FROM DEAD BODIES AND ANIMALS OF THE WHEEL
 BEFORE (<em>previous, Third Round</em>);<em> </em>AND FROM CAST-OFF
 DUST; THE FIRST ANIMALS (<em>of this Round</em>)<em> </em>WERE
 PRODUCED.
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>The Occult doctrine maintains that, in this
 Round, the mammalians were a later work of evolution than man.
 Evolution proceeds in cycles. The great Manvantaric cycle of Seven
 Rounds, beginning in the First Round with mineral, vegetable,
 and animal, brings its evolutionary work on the descending arc
 to a dead stop in the middle of the Fourth <em>Race, </em>at the
 close of the first half of the Fourth <em>Round. </em>It is on
 our Earth, then, (the Fourth sphere and the lowest) and in the
 present <em>Round, </em>that this middle point has been reached.
 And since the Monad has passed, after its "first inmetallization"
 on Globe A, through the mineral, vegetable, and animal worlds
 in every degree of the three states of matter, except the last
 degree of the third or solid state, which it reached only at the
 "<em>mid-point of evolution</em>"<em> </em>it is but
 logical and natural that at the beginning of the Fourth Round
 on Globe D, Man should be the first to appear; and also that his
 frame should be of the most tenuous matter that is compatible
 with objectivity. To make it still clearer: if the Monad begins
 its cycle of incarnations through the three objective kingdoms
 on the descending curved line, it has necessarily to enter on
 the re-ascending curved line of the sphere as a man also. On the
 descending arc it is the spiritual which is gradually transformed
 into the material. On the middle line of the base, Spirit and
 Matter are equilibrized in Man. On the ascending arc, Spirit is
 slowly re-asserting itself at the expense of the physical, or
 matter, so that, at the close of the seventh Race of the Seventh
 Round, the Monad will find itself as</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 181 MEN, THE PROGENITORS OF ANIMALS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 free from matter and all its qualities as it was in the beginning;
 having gained in addition the experience and wisdom, the fruition
 of all its personal lives, without their evil and temptations.
 </p><p>
 This order of evolution is found also in <em>Genesis</em> (<em>ch.
 </em>1 <em>and </em>2) if one reads it in its true esoteric sense,
 for chapter i. contains the history of the first Three Rounds,
 as well as that of the first Three Races of the Fourth, up to
 that moment when Man is called to conscious life by the Elohim
 of Wisdom. In the first chapter, animals, whales and fowls of
 the air, are created before the androgyne Adam.* In the second,
 Adam (the sexless) comes first, and the animals only appear after
 him. Even the state of mental torpor and unconsciousness of the
 first two races, and of the first half of the Third Race, is symbolized,
 in the second chapter of <em>Genesis, </em>by the <em>deep sleep
 of Adam. </em>It was the dreamless sleep of mental inaction, the
 slumber of the Soul and Mind, which was meant by that "sleep,"
 and not at all the physiological process of differentiation of
 sexes, as a learned French theorist (M. Naudin) imagined.
 </p><p>
 The Puranas, the Chaldean and Egyptian fragments, and also the
 Chinese traditions, all show an agreement with the Secret Doctrine
 as to the process and order of evolution. We find in them the
 corroboration of almost all our teaching. For instance: the statement
 concerning the oviparous mode of procreation of the Third Race,
 and even a hint at a less innocent mode of the procreation of
 the first mammal forms, "gigantic, transparent, dumb and
 monstrous they were," says the Commentary. Study the stories
 of the several Rishis and their multifarious progeny; <em>e.g</em>.,
 Pulastya is the father of <em>all the Serpents and Nagas -- </em>the
 oviparous brood; Kasyapa was grandsire, through his wife Tamra,
 of the birds and of Garuda, king of the feathered tribe; while
 by his wife Surabhi, he was the parent of cows and buffaloes,
 etc., etc.
 </p><p>
 In the Secret Doctrine, the first <em>Nagas -- </em>beings wiser
 than Serpents -- are the "Sons of Will and Yoga," born
 before the complete separation of the sexes, "matured in
 the man-bearing eggs** produced by the power (Kriyasakti) of the
 holy sages" of the early Third Race.***
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *An allegorical reference to the "Sacred Animals" of
 the Zodiac and other heavenly bodies. Some Kabalists see in them
 the prototypes of the animals.
 </p><p>
 ** In "Hesiod," Zeus creates his <em>third </em>race
 of men out of ash-trees. In the "Popol Vuh" the Third
 Race of men is created out of the tree<em> Tzita</em> and the
 marrow of the reed called <em>Sibac. </em>But Sibac means "egg"
 in the mystery language of the <em>Artufas </em>(or Initiation
 caves). In a report sent in 1812 to the Cortes by Don Baptista
 Pino it is said: "All the Pueblos have their <em>Artufas
 -- </em>so<em> </em>the natives call subterranean rooms with only
 a single door where they (secretly) assemble. . . . . These are
 impenetrable temples . . . . and the doors are always closed to
 the Spaniards. . . . . They adore the Sun and Moon . . . . fire
 and the great SNAKE (the creative power), whose eggs are called
 <em>Sibac.</em>"
 </p><p>
 *** There is a notable difference <em>esoterically </em>between
 the words Sarpa and Naga, [[Footnote continued on next page]]
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 182 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ". . . . . In these were incarnated the Lords of the three
 (upper) worlds, the various classes of Rudras, who had been <em>Tushitas,
 </em>who had been <em>Jayas, </em>who are <em>Adityas</em>;"<em>
 </em>for, as explained by Parasara, "There are a hundred
 appellations of the immeasurably mighty Rudras."
 </p><p>
 Some of the descendants of the primitive Nagas, the Serpents of
 Wisdom, peopled America, when its continent arose during the palmy
 days of the great Atlantis, (America being the <em>Patala </em>or
 Antipodes of Jambu-Dwipa, not of Bharata-Varsha). Otherwise, whence
 the traditions and legends -- the latter <em>always more true
 than history, </em>as says Augustin Thierry -- and even the identity
 in the names of certain "medicine men" and priests,
 who exist to this day in Mexico? We shall have to say something
 of the <em>Nargals </em>and the <em>Nagals </em>and also of <em>Nagalism,
 </em>called "devil-worship" by the Missionaries.
 </p><p>
 In almost all the Puranas, the story of the "Sacrifice of
 Daksha" is given, the oldest account of which is to be found
 in <em>Vayu Purana. </em>Allegorical as it is, there is more meaning
 and biological revelation in it to a Naturalist, than in all the
 <em>pseudo-scientific </em>vagaries, which are regarded as learned
 theories and hypotheses.
 </p><p>
 Daksha, who is regarded as the Chief Progenitor, is, moreover,
 pointed out as the creator of <em>physical man </em>in the "fable,"
 which makes him lose his head from his body in the general strife
 between the gods and the <em>Raumas. </em>This head, being burnt
 in the fire, is replaced by the <em>head of a ram </em>(Kasi-Khanda).
 Now the ram's head and horns are ever the symbol of generating
 power and of reproductive force, and are <em>phallic. </em>As
 we have shown, it is Daksha who establishes the era of men engendered
 by sexual intercourse. But this mode of procreation did not occur
 suddenly, as one may think, and required long ages before it became
 the one "natural" way. Therefore, his sacrifice to the
 gods is shown as interfered with by Siva, the <em>destroying </em>deity<em>,
 evolution and </em>PROG<em>RESS  personified, </em>who is the
 <em>regenerator </em>at the same time; who destroys things under
 one form but to recall them to life under another more perfect
 type. Siva-Rudra creates the terrible Virabhadra (born of his
 breath) the "thousand-headed, thousand-armed" (etc.)
 monster, and commissions him to destroy the sacrifice prepared
 by Daksha. Then Virabhadra, "abiding in the region of the
 ghosts (ethereal men) . . . .
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] though they are both
 used indiscriminately. Sarpa (serpent) is from the root <em>Srip,
 serpo </em>to creep; and they are called "Ahi," from
 <em>Ha</em>, to abandon. "The sarpa was produced from Brahma's
 hair, which, owing to his fright at beholding the Yakshas, whom
 he had created horrible to behold, fell off from the head, each
 hair becoming a serpent. They are called Sarpa from their creeping
 and <em>Ahi </em>because they had deserted the head" (Wilson).
 But the <em>Nagas, </em>their serpent's tail notwithstanding,
 do not creep, but manage to walk, run and fight in the allegories.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 183 ARCHAIC ZOOLOGY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>created from the pores of the skin </em>(<em>Romakupas</em>)<em>,
 </em>powerful Raumas,* (or Raumyas)." Now, however mythical
 the allegory, the Mahabharata, which is history as much as is
 the Iliad, shows** the Raumyas and other races, as springing in
 the same manner from the <em>Romakupas,</em> hair<em> </em>or
 skin pores. This allegorical description of the "sacrifice"
 is full of significance to the students of the Secret Doctrine
 who know of the "Sweat-born."
 </p><p>
 In the Vayu Purana's account of Daksha's sacrifice, moreover,
 it is said to have taken place in the presence of creatures <em>born
 from the egg, </em>from the vapour, vegetation, pores of the skin,
 and, finally only, from the womb.
 </p><p>
 Daksha typifies the early Third Race, holy and pure, still devoid
 of an individual <em>Ego,</em> and having merely the passive capacities.
 Brahma, therefore, commands him to create (in the exoteric texts);
 when, obeying the command, he made "inferior and superior"
 (<em>avara and vara</em>)<em> </em>progeny (<em>putra</em>),<em>
 bipeds </em>and <em>quadrupeds</em>;<em> </em>and by his <em>will,</em>
 gave birth to females . . . . to the gods, the <em>Daityas </em>(giants
 of the Fourth Race), the snake-gods, animals, cattle and the <em>Danavas
 </em>(Titans and demon Magicians) and other beings."
 </p><p>
 . . . . "From that period forward, <em>living creatures were
 engendered</em> <em>by sexual intercourse. Before the time of
 Daksha, they were variously</em> <em>propagated -- </em>by the
 <em>will</em>, by sight, by touch, and by <em>Yoga-power.</em>"***<em>
 </em>And now comes the simply zoological teaching.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 29. <strong>A</strong>NIMALS WITH BONES, DRAGONS OF THE DEEP AND
 FLYING SARPAS (<em>serpents</em>)<em> </em>WERE ADDED TO THE CREEPING
 THINGS. <strong>T</strong>HEY THAT CREEP ON THE GROUND GOT WINGS.
 <strong>T</strong>HEY OF THE LONG NECKS IN THE WATER, BECAME THE
 PROGENITORS OF THE FOWLS OF THE AIR (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) This is a point on which the teachings and modern
 biological speculation are in perfect accord. The missing links
 representing this transition process between reptile and bird
 are apparent to the veriest bigot, especially in the <em>ornithoscelidae,
 hesperornis, </em>and the archaeopteryx of Vogt.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 30. <strong>D</strong>URING THE <strong>T</strong>HIRD (<em>Race</em>),<em>
 </em>THE BONELESS ANIMALS GREW AND CHANGED: THEY BECAME ANIMALS
 WITH BONES (<em>a</em>), THEIR <strong>C</strong>HHAYAS BECAME
 SOLID (<em>also</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Wilson translates the word as "demigods" (<em>See
 his Vishnu Purana, p. </em>130); but Raurnas or Raumyas are simply
 a race, a tribe.
 </p><p>
 ** xii. 10308.
 </p><p>
 ***<em> </em>"<em>Vishnu Purana</em>" </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 184 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 31. <strong>T</strong>HE ANIMALS SEPARATED THE FIRST (<em>into
 mate and female</em>) (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>. . . .
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) Vertebrates, and after that mammalians. Before that
 the animals were also ethereal proto-organisms, just as man was.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) The fact of former hermaphrodite mammals and the
 subsequent separation of sexes is now indisputable, even from
 the stand-point of Biology. As Prof. Oscar Schmidt, an avowed
 Darwinist, shows: "Use and disuse combined with selection
 elucidate (?) <em>the separation of the sexes, </em>and the existence,
 totally incomprehensible, of rudimentary sexual organs. In the
 Vertebrata especially, <em>each sex possesses such distinct traces
 of the reproductive apparatus characteristic of the other, </em>that
 even antiquity assumed hermaphroditism as a natural primeval form
 of mankind. . . . The tenacity with which the rudiments of sexual
 organs are inherited is remarkable. In the class of mammals, actual
 hermaphroditism is unheard of, although through the whole period
 of their development they drag along with them these residues
 born by <em>their unknown ancestry, </em>no one can say how long
 ago."*
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 31. . . . . <strong>T</strong>HEY (<em>the animals</em>) BEGAN
 TO BREED. <strong>T</strong>HE TWO-FOLD <em>MAN </em>(<em>then</em>)<em>
 </em>SEPARATED ALSO. <strong>H</strong>E (man), SAID "<strong>L</strong>ET
 US AS THEY; LET US UNITE AND MAKE CREATURES." <strong>T</strong>HEY
 DID. . . .
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 32. <strong>A</strong>ND THOSE WHICH HAD NO SPARK (<em>the </em>"<em>narrow-brained</em>"**<em>
 TOOK </em>HUGE SHE-ANIMALS UNTO THEM (<em>a</em>).<strong> T</strong>HEY
 BEGAT UPON THEM DUMB RACES. <strong>D</strong>UMB THEY WERE (<em>the
 </em>"<em>narrow-brained</em>")<em> </em>THEMSELVES.
 <strong>B</strong>UT THEIR TONGUES UNTIED (<em>b</em>). <strong>T</strong>HE
 TONGUES OF THEIR PROGENY REMAINED STILL. <strong>M</strong>ONSTERS
 THEY BRED. <strong>A </strong>RACE OF CROOKED, RED-HAIR-COVERED
 MONSTERS, GOING ON ALL FOURS.*** <strong>A </strong>DUMB RACE,
 TO KEEP THE SHAME UNTOLD.****
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The animals "separated the first," says
 Stanza 31. Bear in mind that at that period men were different,
 even physiologically, from what
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<em>Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,</em>"<em>
 </em>pp. 186-7. The "Unknown Ancestry" referred to are
 the <em>primeval </em>astral prototypes. Cf. § <strong>II</strong>.,
 p. 260 (<em>a</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** See verse 24.
 </p><p>
 *** These "animals," or monsters, are not the anthropoid
 or any other apes, but verily what the Anthropologists might call
 the "missing link," the primitive lower man; <em>see
 infra.</em> 
 </p><p>
 **** The shame of their animal origin which our modern scientists
 would emphasize if they could.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 185 THE SIN OF THE MINDLESS MEN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 they are now, having passed the middle point of the Fifth Race.
 We are not told what the "huge she-animals" were; but
 they certainly were as different from any we know now, as were
 the men.
 </p><p>
 This was the first physical "fall into matter" of some
 of the then existing and lower races. Bear in mind Stanza 24.
 The "Sons of Wisdom" had spurned the early <em>Third
 </em>Race, <em>i.e</em>., the non-developed, and are shown incarnating
 in, and thereby endowing with intellect, the <em>later </em>Third
 Race. Thus the sin of the brainless or "mindless" Races,
 who had no "spark" and were irresponsible, fell upon
 those who failed to do by them their Karmic duty.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>See later on concerning the beginning of
 human speech.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong><a name="what">W</a></strong>HAT MAY BE THE <strong>O</strong>BJECTIONS
 TO THE <strong>F</strong>OREGOING.
 </p><p>
 Thus Occultism rejects the idea that Nature developed man from
 the ape, or even from an ancestor common to both, but traces,
 on the contrary, some of the most anthropoid species to the Third
 Race man of the early Atlantean period. As this proposition will
 be maintained and defended elsewhere, a few words more are all
 that are needed at present. For greater clearness, however, we
 shall repeat in brief what was said previously in Book I., Stanza
 <strong>VI.</strong> 
 </p><p>
 Our teachings show that, while it is quite correct to say that
 nature had built, at one time, around the human astral form an
 <em>ape-like external </em>shape, yet it is as correct that this
 shape was no more that of the "missing link," than were
 the coverings of that astral form, during the course of its natural
 evolution through all the kingdoms of nature. Nor was it, as shown
 in the proper place, on this Fourth Round planet that such evolution
 took place, but only during the First, Second, and Third Rounds,
 when MAN was, in turn, "a stone, a plant, and an animal"
 until he became what he was in the First Root-Race of present
 humanity. The real line of evolution differs from the Darwinian,
 and the two systems are irreconcilable, except when the latter
 is divorced from the dogma of "Natural Selection" and
 the like. Indeed, between the <em>Monera </em>of Haeckel and the
 <em>Sarisripa </em>of Manu, there lies an impassable chasm in
 the shape of the <em>Jiva</em>;<em> </em>for the "human"
 Monad, whether<em> immetallized </em>in the stone-atom, or <em>invegetallized
 </em>in the plant, or <em>inanimalized </em>in the animal, is
 still and ever a divine, hence also a HUMAN Monad. It ceases to
 be human only when it becomes <em>absolutely divine. </em>The
 terms "mineral," "vegetable" and "animal"
 <em>monad </em>are meant to create a superficial distinction:
 there is no such thing as a Monad (jiva)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 186 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 other than divine, and consequently having been, or having to
 become, human. And the latter term has to remain meaningless unless
 the difference is well understood. The Monad is a drop out of
 the shoreless Ocean beyond, or, to be correct, <em>within</em>
 the plane of primeval differentiation. It is divine in its higher
 and <em>human </em>in its lower condition -- the adjectives "higher"
 and "lower" being used for lack of better words -- and
 a monad it remains at all times, save in the Nirvanic state, under
 whatever conditions, or whatever external forms. As the Logos
 reflects the Universe in the Divine Mind, and the manifested Universe
 reflects itself in each of its Monads, as Leibnitz put it, repeating
 an Eastern teaching, so the <strong>M</strong>ONAD has, during
 the cycle of its incarnations, to reflect in itself every <em>root-form
 </em>of each kingdom. Therefore, the Kabalists say correctly that
 "<strong>M</strong>AN becomes a stone, a plant, an animal,
 a man, a Spirit, and finally God. Thus accomplishing his cycle
 or circuit and returning to the point from which he had started
 as the <em>heavenly </em><strong>M</strong>AN." But by "Man"
 the divine Monad is meant, and not the thinking Entity, much less
 his physical body. While rejecting the immortal Soul, the men
 of Science now try to trace the latter through a series of animal
 forms from the lowest to the highest; whereas, in truth, all the
 present fauna are the descendants of those primordial monsters
 of which the Stanzas speak. The animals -- the creeping beasts
 and those in the waters that preceded man in this Fourth Round,
 as well as those contemporary with the Third Race, and again the
 mammalia that are posterior to the Third and Fourth Races -- all
 are either directly or indirectly the mutual and correlative product
 (physically) of man. It is correct to say that the man of this
 Manvantara, <em>i.e</em>., during the three preceding Rounds,
 has passed through all the kingdoms of nature. That he was "a
 stone, a plant, an animal." But (<em>a</em>) these stones,
 plants, and animals were the prototypes, the filmy presentments
 of those of the Fourth Round; and (<em>b</em>) even those at the
 beginning of the Fourth Round were the astral shadows of the present,
 as the Occultists express it. And finally the forms and <em>genera
 </em>of neither man, animal, nor plant were what they became later.
 Thus the astral prototypes of the lower beings of the animal kingdom
 of the Fourth Round, which <em>preceded </em>(the chhayas of)
 <em>Men, </em>were the consolidated, though still very ethereal
 <em>sheaths </em>of the still more ethereal forms or models produced
 at the close of the Third Round on Globe D.* "Produced from
 the residue of the substance matter; from dead bodies of men and
 (other <em>extinct</em>)<em> </em>animals of the wheel before,"
 or the previous <em>Third </em>Round -- as Stanza 24 tells us.
 Hence, while the nondescript "animals"
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <em>Vide </em>"<em>Esoteric Buddhism.</em>" </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 187 THE DARWINISTS MISTAKEN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 that preceded the astral man at the beginning of this life-cycle
 on our Earth were still, so to speak, the progeny of the man of
 the Third Round, the mammalians of this Round owe their existence,
 in a great measure, to man again. Moreover, the "ancestor"
 of the present anthropoid animal, the ape, is the direct production
 of the yet mindless <em>Man,</em> who desecrated his human dignity
 by putting himself physically on the level of an animal.
 </p><p>
 The above accounts for some of the alleged physiological proofs,
 brought forward by the anthropologists as a demonstration of the
 descent of man from the animals.
 </p><p>
 The point most insisted upon by the Evolutionists is that, "The
 history of the embryo is an epitome of that of the race."
 That "every organism, in its development from the egg, runs
 through a series of forms, through which, in like succession,
 its ancestors have passed in the long course of Earth's history.*
 The history of the embryo . . . . is a picture in little, and
 outline of that of the race. <em>This conception forms the gist
 of our fundamental biogenetic law, which we are obliged to place
 at the head of the study of the fundamental law of organic development.</em>"**
 </p><p>
 This modern theory was known as a fact to, and far more philosophically
 expressed by, the Sages and Occultists from the remotest ages.
 A passage from "<em>Isis Unveiled</em>"<em> </em>may
 here be cited to furnish a few points of comparison. In Vol. I.,
 pp. 388-9, it was asked why, with all their great learning, physiologists
 were unable to explain teratological phenomena? Any anatomist
 who has made the development and growth of the embryo "a
 subject of special study," can tell, without much brain-work,
 what daily experience and the evidence of his own eyes show him,
 viz., that up to a certain period, the human embryo is facsimile
 of a young batrachian in its first remove from the spawn -- tadpole.
 But no physiologist or anatomist seems to have had the idea of
 applying to the development of the human being -- from the first
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "A very strong argument in favour of variability is supplied
 by the science of Embryology. Is not a man in the uterus . . .
 . . a simple cell, a vegetable with three or four leaflets, a
 tadpole with branchiae, a mammal with a tail, lastly a primate
 (?) and a biped? It is scarcely possible not to recognise in the
 embryonic evolution a rapid sketch, a faithful summary, of the
 entire organic series." (<em>Lefevre, Philosophy, p. </em>484).
 </p><p>
 The summary alluded to is, however, only that of the <em>store
 of types </em>hoarded up in man, the microcosm. This simple explanation
 meets all such objections, as the presence of the rudimentary
 tail in the foetus -- a fact triumphantly paraded by Haeckel and
 Darwin as conclusively in favour of the Ape-Ancestor theory. <em>It
 may also be pointed out that the presence of a vegetable with
 leaflets </em>in the embryonic stages is <em>not explained </em>on
 ordinary evolutionist principles. Darwinists have not traced man
 through the vegetable, but Occultists have. <em>Why then this
 feature in the embryo, </em>and how do the former explain it?
 </p><p>
 **<em> </em>"<em>The Proofs of Evolution,</em>"<em>
 </em>a lecture by Haeckel. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 188 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 instant of its physical appearance as a germ to its ultimate formation
 and birth -- the Pythagorean esoteric doctrine of metempsychosis,
 so erroneously interpreted by critics. The meaning of the axiom:
 "A stone becomes a plant; a plant, a beast; a beast, a man,
 etc." was mentioned in another place in relation to the spiritual
 and physical evolution of men on this Earth. We will now add a
 few more words to make the matter clearer.
 </p><p>
 What is the primitive shape of the future man? A grain, a corpuscle,
 say some physiologists; a molecule, an ovum of the ovum, say others.
 If it could be analysed -- by the microscope or otherwise -- of
 what ought we to expect to find it composed? Analogically, we
 should say, of a nucleus of inorganic matter, deposited from the
 circulation at the germinating point, and united with a deposit
 of organic matter. In other words, this infinitesimal nucleus
 of the future man is composed of the same elements as a stone
 -- of the same elements as the Earth, which the man is destined
 to inhabit. Moses is cited by the Kabalists as authority for the
 remark that it required earth and water to make a living being,
 and thus it may be said that man first appears as a stone.
 </p><p>
 At the end of three or four weeks the ovum has assumed a plant-like
 appearance, one extremity having become spheroidal and the other
 tapering like a carrot. Upon dissection it is found to be composed,
 like an onion, of very delicate laminae or coats, enclosing a
 liquid. The laminae approach each other at the lower end, and
 the embryo hangs from the root of the umbilicus almost like the
 fruit from the bough. The stone has now become changed, by "metempsychosis,"
 into a plant. Then the embryonic creature begins to shoot out,
 from the inside outward, its limbs, and develops its features.
 The eyes are visible as two black dots; the ears, nose, and mouth
 form depressions, like the points of a pineapple, before they
 begin to project. The embryo develops into an animal-like foetus
 -- the shape of a tadpole -- and, like an amphibious reptile,
 lives in water and develops from it. Its Monad has not yet become
 either human or immortal, for the Kabalists tell us that this
 only occurs at the "fourth hour." One by one the foetus
 assumes the characteristics of the human being, the first flutter
 of the immortal breath passes through its being; it moves; and
 the divine essence settles in the infant frame, which it will
 inhabit until the moment of physical death, when man becomes a
 spirit.
 </p><p>
 This mysterious process of a nine-months' formation, the Kabalists
 call the completion of the "individual cycle of evolution."
 As the foetus develops amidst the <em>liquor amnii </em>in the
 womb, so the Earths germinate in the universal ether, or astral
 fluid, in the womb of the Universe. These cosmic children, like
 their pigmy inhabitants, are at first nuclei; then ovules; then
 gradually mature; and becoming</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 189 NATURALISTS INVENTING LINKS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 mothers, in their turn, develop mineral, vegetable, animal, and
 human forms. From centre to circumference, from the imperceptible
 vesicle to the uttermost conceivable bounds of the Kosmos, those
 glorious thinkers, the Occultists, trace cycle merging into cycle,
 containing and contained in an endless series. The embryo evolving
 in its pre-natal sphere, the individual in his family, the family
 in the state, the state in mankind, the Earth in our system, that
 system in its central universe, the universe in the Kosmos, and
 the Kosmos in the ONE CAUSE . . . thus runs <em>their </em>philosophy
 of evolution, differing as we see, from that of Haeckel: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "All are but parts of one stupendous whole,<br>
 Whose body Nature is, and (Parabrahm) the soul . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 These are the proofs of Occultism, and they are rejected by Science.
 But how is the chasm between the mind of man and animal to be
 bridged in this case? How, if the anthropoid and <em>Homo primigenius
 </em>had, <em>argumenti gratia, </em>a common ancestor (in the
 way modern speculation puts it), did the two groups diverge so
 widely from one another as regards mental capacity? True, the
 Occultist may be told that in every case Occultism does what Science
 repeats; it gives a <em>common </em>ancestor to ape and man, since
 it makes the former issue from primeval man. Ay, but that "primeval
 man" was <em>man</em> only in external form. He was <em>mindless
 </em>and <em>soulless </em>at the time he begot, with a female
 animal monster, the forefather of a series of apes. This speculation
 -- if speculation it be -- is at least logical, and fills the
 chasm between the mind of man and animal. Thus it accounts for
 and explains the hitherto unaccountable and inexplicable. The
 fact that, in the present stage of evolution, Science is almost
 certain that no issue can follow from the union of man and animal,
 is considered and explained elsewhere.
 </p><p>
 Now what is the fundamental difference between the accepted (or
 nearly so) conclusions, as enunciated in "<em>The Pedigree
 of Man,</em>"<em> </em>viz., that man and ape have a common
 ancestor; and the teachings of Occultism, which deny this conclusion
 and accept the fact that all things and all living beings have
 originated from one common source? Materialistic science makes
 man evolve gradually to what <em>he is now, </em>and, starting
 from the first protoplasmic speck called <em>Moneron </em>(which
 we are told has, like the rest, "originated in the course
 of immeasurable ages from a few, or from one simple, <em>spontaneously
 arising </em>original form, that has obeyed one law of evolution"),
 pass through "unknown and unknowable" types up to the
 ape, and thence to the human being. Where the transitional shapes
 are discoverable we are not told; for the simple reason that no
 "missing links" between man and the apes have ever yet
 been found, though this fact in no way prevents men like Haeckel
 from inventing them <em>ad libitum.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 190 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Nor will they ever be met with; simply, again, because that link
 which unites man with his real ancestry is searched for on the
 objective plane and in the material world of forms, whereas it
 is safely hidden from the microscope and dissecting knife <em>within
 </em>the animal tabernacle of man himself. We repeat what we have
 said in Isis Unveiled: --
 </p><p>
 ". . . . . . . All things had their origin in spirit -- evolution
 having originally begun from above and proceeded downward, instead
 of the reverse, as taught in the Darwinian theory. In other words,
 there has been a gradual materialization of forms until a fixed
 ultimate of debasement is reached. This point is that at which
 the doctrine of modern evolution enters into the arena of speculative
 hypothesis. Arrived at this period we will find it easier to understand
 Haeckel's <em>Anthropogeny, </em>which traces the pedigree of
 man 'from its protoplasmic root, sodden in the mud of seas which
 existed before the oldest of the fossiliferous rocks were deposited,'
 according to Professor Huxley's exposition. We may believe the
 man (of the Third Round) evolved 'by gradual modification of an
 (astral) mammal of ape-like organization' still easier when we
 remember that (though in a more condensed and less elegant, but
 still as comprehensible, phraseology) the same theory was said
 by Berosus to have been taught many thousands of years before
 his time by the man-fish Oannes or Dagon, the semi-demon of Babylonia*
 (though on somewhat modified lines).
 </p><p>
 "But what lies back of the Darwinian line of descent? So
 far as he is concerned nothing but 'unverifiable hypotheses.'
 For, as he puts it, he views all beings 'as the lineal descendants
 of some few beings which lived long before the first bed of the
 Silurian system was deposited.'** He does not attempt to show
 us who these 'few beings' were. But it answers our purpose quite
 as well, for, in the admission of their existence at all, resort
 to the ancients for corroboration and elaboration of the idea
 receives the stamp of scientific approbation. . . . "
 </p><p>
 Truly, as also said in our first work: "If we accept Darwin's
 theory of the development of species, we find that his starting-point
 is placed in front of an open door. We are at liberty with him,
 to either remain within, or cross the threshold, beyond which
 lies the limitless and the incomprehensible, or rather the <em>Unutterable.
 </em>If our mortal language is inadequate to express what our
 spirit dimly foresees in the great '<em>Beyond</em>'<em> -- </em>while
 on this earth -- it<em> must </em>realize it at some point in
 the timeless Eternity." But what lies "beyond"
 Haeckel's theory? Why <em>Bathybius Haeckelii, </em>and no more!
 </p><p>
 A further answer is given in Part <strong>III</strong>. <em>Addenda.</em>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Cory: "Ancient Fragments."
 </p><p>
 ** "Origin of Species," pp. 448, 489, first edition.
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-10.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>