<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 656 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h3>ยง II.<br>
 THE ANCESTORS MANKIND IS OFFERED BY SCIENCE.</h3>
 
 <p>
 ---------------------
 </p><blockquote>
 "The question of questions for mankind -- the problem which
 underlies all others, and is more deeply interesting than any
 other -- is the ascertainment of the place which man occupies
 in Nature, and of his relations to the Universe of things."
 -- <b>H</b>UXLEY.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 ---------------------
 </p><p>
 <b>T</b>HE world stands divided this day, and hesitates between
 <i>divine</i> progenitors<i> -- </i>be they Adam and Eve or the
 lunar Pitris<i> -- </i>and<i> Bathybius Haeckelii, </i>the gelatinous
 hermit of the briny deep. Having explained the occult theory,
 it may now be compared with that of the modem Materialism. The
 reader is invited to choose between the two after having judged
 them on their respective merits.
 </p><p>
 We may derive some consolation for the rejection of our divine
 ancestors, in finding that the Haeckelian speculations receive
 no better treatment at the hands of strictly <i>exact </i>Science
 than do our own. Haeckel's<i> phylogenesis </i>is no less laughed
 at by the foes of his fantastic evolution, by other and greater
 Scientists, than our primeval races will be. As du Bois-Reymond
 puts it, we may believe him easily when he says that "ancestral
 trees of our race sketched in the 'Schopfungs-geschichte' are
 of about as much value as are the pedigrees of the Homeric heroes
 in the eyes of the historical critic."
 </p><p>
 This settled, everyone will see that one hypothesis is as good
 as another. And as we find that German naturalist (Haeckel) himself
 confessing that neither geology (in its history of the past) nor
 the ancestral history of organisms will ever "rise to the
 position of a real exact Science,"* a large margin is thus
 left to Occult Science to make its annotations and lodge its protests.
 The world is left to choose between the teachings of Paracelsus,
 the "Father of Modern Chemistry," and those of Haeckel,
 the Father of the mythical <i>Sozura. </i>We demand no more.
 </p><p>
 Without presuming to take part in the quarrel of such very learned
 naturalists as du Bois-Reymond and Haeckel <i>a propos </i>of
 our blood relationship to "those ancestors (of ours) which
 have led up from the unicellular classes, Vermes, Acrania, Pisces,
 Amphibia, Reptilia to the Aves"<i> -- </i>one may put in
 a few words, a question or two, for the information of our readers.
 Availing ourselves of the opportunity, and bearing
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Pedigree of Man."<i> -- </i>"<i>The Proofs of
 Evolution,</i>"<i> p. </i>273.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 657 AN UNVERIFIED CHARGE AGAINST THE ANCIENTS.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 in mind Darwin's theories of natural selection, etc., we would
 ask Science -- with regard to the origin of the human and animal
 species -- which theory of evolution of the two herewith described
 is the more scientific, or the more <i>unscientific, </i>if so
 preferred.
 </p><p>
 (1). Is it that of an Evolution which starts from the beginning
 with sexual propagation?
 </p><p>
 (2)<i>. </i>Or that teaching which shows the gradual development
 of organs; their solidification, and the procreation of each species,
 at first by simple easy separation from one into two or even several
 individuals. Then follows a fresh development<i> -- </i>the first
 step to a species of separate distinct sexes<i> -- </i>the hermaphrodite
 condition; then again, a kind of Parthenogenesis, "virginal
 reproduction," when the egg-cells are formed within the body,
 issuing from it in atomic emanations and becoming matured outside
 of it; until, finally, after a definite separation into sexes,
 the human beings begin procreating through sexual connection?
 </p><p>
 Of these two, the former "theory," -- rather, a "<i>revealed
 </i>fact" -- is enunciated by all the <i>exoteric </i>Bibles
 (except the Puranas), preeminently by the Jewish Cosmogony. The
 last one, is that which is taught by the Occult philosophy, as
 explained all along.
 </p><p>
 An answer is found to our question in a volume just published
 by Mr. S. Laing -- the best lay exponent of Modern Science.* In
 chapter viii. of his latest work, "A Modern Zoroastrian,"
 the author begins by twitting "all ancient religions and
 philosophies" for "assuming a male and female principle
 for their gods." At first sight, he says "the distinction
 of sex appears as fundamental as that of plant and animal."
 . . . . "The Spirit of god brooding over Chaos and producing
 the world," he goes on to complain, "is only a later
 edition, revised according to monotheistic ideas, of the far older
 Chaldean legend which describes the creation of Kosmos out of
 Chaos by the co-operations of great gods, male and female . .
 " Thus, in the orthodox Christian creed we are taught to
 repeat "begotten, not made," a phrase which is absolute
 nonsense, an instance of using words like counterfeit notes, which
 have no solid value of an idea behind them. For "begotten"
 is a very definite term which "implies the conjunction of
 two opposite sexes to produce a new individual."
 </p><p>
 However we may agree with the learned author as to the inadvisability
 of using wrong words, and the terrible anthropomorphic and <i>phallic</i>
 element in the old Scriptures<i> -- </i>especially in the orthodox
 Christian Bible -- nevertheless, there may be two extenuating
 circumstances in the case. Firstly, all these "ancient philosophies"
 and "modern
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Author of "Modern Science and Modern Thought."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 658 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 religions" are<i> -- </i>as sufficiently shown in these two
 volumes<i> -- </i>an exoteric veil thrown over the face of esoteric
 truth; and -- as the direct result of this<i> -- </i>they are
 allegorical, <i>i.e.</i>, mythological in form; but still they
 are immensely more philosophical in essence than any of the new
 <i>scientific </i>theories, so-called. Secondly, from the Orphic
 theogony down to Ezra's last remodelling of the Pentateuch, every
 old Scripture having in its origin borrowed its facts from the
 East, it has been subjected to constant alterations by friend
 and foe, until of the original version there remained but the
 name, a dead shell from which the Spirit had been gradually eliminated.
 </p><p>
 This alone ought to show that no religious work now extant can
 be understood without the help of the Archaic wisdom, the primitive
 foundation on which they were all built.
 </p><p>
 But to return to the direct answer expected from Science to <i>our
 </i>direct question. It is given by the same author, when, following
 his train of thought on the unscientific euhemerization of the
 powers of Nature in ancient creeds, he pronounces a condemnatory
 verdict upon them in the following terms: --
 </p><p>
 "Science, however, makes sad havoc with this impression <i>of
 sexual generation being the original and only mode of reproduction,*
 </i>and the microscope and dissecting knife of the naturalist
 introduce us to new and altogether unsuspected (?) worlds of life.
 . . ."
 </p><p>
 So little "<i>unsuspected,</i>"<i> </i>indeed, that
 the <i>original a</i>-sexual "modes of reproduction"
 must have been known<i> -- </i>to the ancient Hindus, at any rate
 -- Mr. Laing's assertion to the contrary, notwithstanding. In
 view of the statement in the Vishnu Purana, quoted by us elsewhere,
 that Daksha "established sexual intercourse as the means
 of multiplication," only after a series of other "modes,"
 which are all enumerated therein, (<i>Vol. II., p. </i>12<i>,
 Wilson</i>'<i>s Transl.</i>)<i>, </i>it becomes difficult to deny
 the fact. This assertion, moreover, is found, note well, in an
 EXOTERIC work. Then, Mr. S. Laing goes on to tell us that: --
 </p><p>
 . . . . "By far the larger proportion of living forms, in
 number . . . . have come into existence, <i>without the aid of
 sexual </i>propagation." He then instances Haeckel's monera
 . . . . "<i>multiplying by self-division.</i>"<i> </i>The
 next stage the author shows in the nucleated cell, "which
 does exactly the same thing." The following stage is that
 in "which the organism does not divide into two equal parts,
 but a <i>small portion of it swells out </i>. . . . <i>and finally
 parts company </i>and starts on separate existence, which grows
 to the size of the parent by its inherent faculty of manufacturing
 fresh protoplasm from surrounding inorganic materials."**
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Vide Part I. of this volume, page 183, Stanza <strong>VIII</strong>.
 </p><p>
 ** In this, as shown in Part I., Modern Science was again anticipated,
 far beyond its own speculations in this direction, by <i>Archaic
 </i>Science.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 659 VARIOUS MODES OF REPRODUCTION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This is followed by a many-celled organism which is formed by
 "<i>germ-buds reduced to spores, or single cells, which are
 emitted from the parent</i>". . . .<i> </i>when "we
 are at the threshold of that system of sexual propagation, which
 has (now) become the rule in all the higher families of animals"
 . . . . It is when an "organism, having advantages in the
 struggle for life, established itself permanently" . . .
 . that special organs developed to meet the altered condition
 . . . . . when a distinction "would be firmly established
 of a female organ or ovary containing the egg or primitive cell
 from which the new being was to be developed." . . . . "This
 is confirmed by a study of embryology, <i>which shows that in
 the </i>HUMAN and higher animal species <i>the distinction of
 sex is not developed </i>until a considerable progress has been
 made in the growth of the embryo . . . . " In the great majority
 of plants, and in some lower families of animals . . . the male
 and female organs are developed within the same being . . . .
 . a hermaphrodite. Moreover, in the "virginal reproduction
 -- germ-cells apparently similar in all respects to egg-cells,
 develop themselves into new individuals <i>without any fructifying
 element,</i>"<i> </i>etc., etc. (pp. 103-107).
 </p><p>
 Of all which we are as perfectly well aware as of this<i> -- </i>that
 the above was never applied by the very learned English popularizer
 of Huxleyo-Haeckelian theories to the genus <i>homo. </i>He limits
 this to specks of protoplasm, plants, bees, snails, and so on.
 But if he would be true to the theory of descent, he must be as
 true to ontogenesis, in which the fundamental biogenetic law,
 we are told, runs as follows: "the development of the embryo
 (ontogeny) is a condensed and abbreviated repetition <i>of the
 evolution of the race </i>(phylogeny). This repetition is the
 more complete, the more the true original order of evolution (palingenesis)
 has been retained by continual heredity. On the other hand, this
 repetition is the less complete, the more by varying adaptations
 the later spurious development (caenogenesis) has obtained."
 (<i>Anthrop. 3rd edition, p. </i>11.)
 </p><p>
 This shows to us that every living creature and thing on earth,
 including man, evolved from <i>one common primal form. </i>Physical
 man must have passed through the same stages of the evolutionary
 process in the various modes of procreation as other animals have:
 he must have <i>divided </i>himself; then, hermaphrodite, have
 given birth <i>parthenogenetically </i>(on the immaculate principle)
 to his young ones; the next stage would be the <i>oviparous --
 </i>at first "without any fructifying element," then
 "with the help of the fertilitary spore"; and only after
 the final and definite evolution of both sexes, would he become
 a distinct "male and female," when reproduction through
 sexual union would grow into universal law. So far, all this is
 scientifically proven. There remains but one thing to be ascertained:
 the plain and comprehensively described</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 660 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 processes of such <i>ante</i>-sexual reproduction. This is done
 in the Occult books, a slight outline of which was attempted by
 the writer in Part I. of this Volume.
 </p><p>
 Either this, or<i> -- </i>man is a distinct being. Occult philosophy
 may call him that, because of his distinctly <i>dual</i> nature.
 Science cannot do so, once that it rejects every interference
 save <i>mechanical laws, and </i>admits of no principle outside
 matter. The former<i> -- </i>the archaic Science --allows the
 human physical frame to have passed through every form, from the
 lowest to the very highest, its present one, or from the simple
 to the complex<i> -- </i>to use the accepted terms. But it claims
 that in this cycle (the fourth), the frame having already existed
 among the types and models of nature from the preceding Rounds<i>
 -- </i>that it was quite ready for man from the beginning of <i>this
 Round.* </i>The Monad had but to step into the astral body of
 the progenitors, in order that the work of physical consolidation
 should begin around the shadowy prototype.**
 </p><p>
 What would Science say to this? It would answer, of course, that
 as man appeared on earth as the latest of the mammalians, he had
 no need, no more than those mammals, to pass through the primitive
 stages of procreation as above described. His mode of procreation
 was already established on Earth when he appeared. In this case,
 we may reply: since to this day not the remotest sign of a link
 between man and the animal has yet been found, then (if the Occultist
 doctrine is to be repudiated) he must have sprung <i>miraculously
 </i>in<i> </i>nature, like a fully armed Minerva from Jupiter's
 brain. And in such case the Bible is right, along with other national
 "revelations." Hence the scientific scorn, so freely
 lavished by the author of "A Modern
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Theosophists will remember that, according to Occult teaching,
 Cyclic pralayas so-called are but <i>obscurations, </i>during
 which periods Nature, <i>i.e.</i>, everything visible and <i>invisible
 </i>on a resting planet<i> -- </i>remains <i>in statu quo. </i>Nature
 rests and slumbers, no work of destruction going on on the globe
 even if no active work is done. All forms, as well as their astral
 types, remain as they were at the last moment of its activity.
 The "night" of a planet has hardly any twilight preceding
 it. It is caught like a huge mammoth by an avalanche, and remains
 slumbering and frozen till the next dawn of its new day<i> --
 </i>a very short one indeed in comparison to the "Day of
 Brahma."
 </p><p>
 ** This will be pooh-poohed, because it will not be understood
 by our modern men of science; but every Occultist and theosophist
 will easily realize the process. There <i>can be no objective
 </i>form on Earth (nor in the Universe either), without its astral
 prototype being first formed in Space. From Phidias down to the
 humblest workman in the ceramic art<i> -- </i>a sculptor has had
 to create first of all a model in his mind, then sketch it in
 one and two dimensional lines, and then only can he reproduce
 it in a three dimensional or objective figure. And if human mind
 is a living demonstration of such successive stages in the process
 of evolution -- how can it be otherwise when <b>N</b>ATURE'S <b>M</b>IND
 and creative powers are concerned?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 661 WHERE ARE THE "MISSING LINKS"?
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 Zoroastrian" upon ancient philosophies and <i>exoteric </i>creeds,
 becomes premature and uncalled for. Nor would the sudden discovery
 of a "missing-link" -- like fossil mend matters at all.
 For neither one such solitary specimen nor the <i>scientific conclusions
 </i>thereupon, could insure its being the long-sought-for relic,
 <i>i.e.</i>, that of an undeveloped, still a once <i>speaking
 </i>MAN. Something more would be required as a final proof (<i>vide
 infra, Note</i>)<i>. </i>Besides which, even <i>Genesis </i>takes
 up man, her Adam of dust, only where the Secret Doctrine leaves
 her "Sons of God and Wisdom" and picks up the physical
 man of the <strong>T</strong>HIRD Race. Eve is <i>not </i>"begotten,"
 but is extracted out of Adam on the manner of "Amoeba, A,"
 contracting in the middle and splitting into Amoeba B<i> -- </i>by
 division. (<i>See</i> p<i>. </i>103, in<i> </i>"<i>The Modern
 Zoroastrian.</i>")<i> </i>Nor has human speech developed
 from the various animal sounds.
 </p><p>
 Haeckel's theory that "speech arose gradually from a few
 simple, crude animal sounds . . . ." as such "speech
 still remains amongst a few races of lower rank" (<i>Darwinian
 theory in </i>"<i>Pedigree of Man,</i>"<i> </i>p. 22)
 is altogether unsound, as argued by Professor Max Muller, among
 others. He contends that no plausible explanation has yet been
 given as to how the "roots" of language came into existence.
 A <i>human</i> brain is necessary for <i>human </i>speech. And
 figures relating to the size of the respective brains of man and
 ape show how deep is the gulf which separates the two. Vogt says
 that the brain of the largest ape, the gorilla, measures no more
 than 30.51 cubic inches; while the average brains of the flat-headed
 Australian natives -- the lowest now in the human races -- amount
 to 99.35 cubic inches! Figures are awkward witnesses and cannot
 lie. Therefore, as truly observed by Dr. F. Pfaff, whose premises
 are as sound and correct as his biblical conclusions are silly:<i>
 -- </i>"The brain of the apes most like man, does not amount
 to quite a third of the brain of the lowest races <i>of men</i>:<i>
 it is not half the size of the brain of a new-born child.</i>"<i>
 </i>("<i>The Age and Origin of Man.</i>")<i> </i>From
 the foregoing it is thus very easy to perceive that in order to
 prove the Huxley-Haeckelian theories of the descent of man, it
 is not <i>one, </i>but a great number of "<i>missing links</i>"
 -- a<i> </i>true ladder of progressive evolutionary steps<i> --
 </i>that would have to be first found and then presented by Science
 to thinking and reasoning humanity, before it would abandon belief
 in gods and the immortal Soul for the worship of Quadrumanic ancestors.
 Mere myths are now greeted as "axiomatic truths." Even
 Alfred Russel Wallace maintains with Haeckel that primitive man
 was a speechless ape-creature. To this Joly answers:<i> -- </i>"Man
 never was, in my opinion, this <i>pithecanthropus alalus </i>whose
 portrait Haeckel has drawn <i>as if he had seen and known him,
 </i>whose<i> singular </i>and<i> completely hypothetical </i>genealogy
 he has even given, from the mere mass of living protoplasm to
 the man endowed with speech and a civilization analo-</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 662 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 gous to that of the Australians and Papuans." ("Man
 before Metals," p. 320<i>,</i> N. Joly.<i> Inter. Scient.
 Series.</i>)
 </p><p>
 Haeckel, among other things, often comes into direct conflict
 with the Science of languages. In the course of his attack on
 Evolutionism (1873, "Mr. Darwin's Philosophy of Language"),
 Prof. Max Muller stigmatized the Darwinian theory as "vulnerable
 at the beginning and at the end." The fact is, that only
 the partial truth of many of the <i>secondary </i>"laws"
 of Darwinism is beyond question -- M. de Quatrefages evidently
 accepting "Natural Selection," the "struggle for
 existence" and transformation within species, as proven not
 once and for ever, but <i>pro. tem. </i>But it may not be amiss,
 perhaps, to condense the linguistic case against the "Ape
 ancestor" theory: --
 </p><p>
 Languages have their phases of growth, etc., like all else in
 nature. It is almost certain that the great linguistic families
 pass through three stages.
 </p><p>
 (1) All words are roots and merely placed in juxtaposition (Radical
 languages).
 </p><p>
 (2) One root defines the other, and becomes merely a determinative
 element (Agglutinative).
 </p><p>
 (3) The determinative element (the determinating meaning of which
 has long lapsed) unites into a whole with the formative element
 (Inflected).
 </p><p>
 The problem then is: Whence these ROOTS? Max Muller argues that
 the existence of these <i>ready-made materials of speech </i>is
 a proof that man cannot be the crown of a long organic series.
 This <i>potentiality of forming roots </i>is the great crux which
 materialists almost invariably avoid.
 </p><p>
 Von Hartmann explains it as a manifestation of the "Unconscious,"
 and admits its cogency <i>versus </i>mechanical Atheism. Hartmann
 is a fair representative of the Metaphysician and Idealist of
 the present age.
 </p><p>
 The argument has never been met by the non-pantheistic Evolutionists.
 To say with Schmidt: "Forsooth are we to halt before the
 origin of language?" is an avowal of dogmatism and of speedy
 defeat. (Cf. his "<i>Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,</i>"<i>
 </i>p. 304.)
 </p><p>
 We respect those men of science who, wise in their generation,
 say: "Prehistoric Past being utterly beyond our powers of
 direct observation, we are too honest, too devoted to the truth
 -- or what we regard as truth<i> -- </i>to speculate upon the
 unknown, giving out our unproven theories along with facts absolutely
 established in modern Science." . . . . "The borderland
 of (metaphysical) knowledge is best left to time, which is the
 best test as to truth" (<i>A Modern Zoroastrian, p. </i>136).
 </p><p>
 This is a wise and an honest sentence in the mouth of a materialist.
 But when a Haeckel, after just saying that "<i>historical
 </i>events of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 663 PROOFS OF OUR "NOBLE DESCENT."
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 past time . . " having "occurred many <i>millions of
 years ago,* </i>. . . are for ever removed from direct observation,"
 and that neither geology nor phylogeny** can or will "rise
 to the position of a real <i>exact </i>science," then<i>
 insists </i>on the development of <i>all</i> organisms<i> -- </i>"from
 the lowest vertebrate to the highest, from Amphioxus to man"
 -- we ask for a weightier proof than he can give. Mere "<i>empirical
 </i>sources of knowledge," so extolled by the author of "<i>Anthropogeny</i>"<i>
 -</i>- when he has to be satisfied with the qualification for
 his own views<i> -- </i>are not competent to settle problems lying
 beyond their domain; nor is it the province of exact science to
 place any reliance on them.*** If "empirical"<i> --
 </i>and Haeckel declares so himself repeatedly<i> -- </i>then
 they are no better, nor any more reliable, in the sight of <i>exact
 </i>research, when extended into the remote past, than our Occult
 teachings of the East, both having to be placed on quite the same
 level. Nor are his <i>phylogenetic and palingenetic </i>speculations
 treated in any better way by the real scientists, than are our
 cyclic repetitions of the evolution of the Great in the minor
 races, and the original order of evolutions. For the province
 of exact, real Science, materialistic though it be, is to carefully
 avoid anything like guess-work, speculation which <i>cannot be
 </i>verified; in short, all <i>suppressio veri </i>and all <i>suggestio
 falsi. </i>The business of the man of exact Science is to observe,
 each in his chosen department, the phenomena of nature; to record,
 tabulate, compare and classify the facts, down to the smallest
 minutiae which <i>are presented to the observation of the senses
 with the help of all the exquisite mechanism that modern invention
 supplies, not by the aid of metaphysical flights of fancy. </i>All
 that he has a legitimate right to do, is to correct by the assistance
 of physical instruments the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It thus appears that in its anxiety to prove our noble descent
 from the catarrhine "baboon," Haeckel's school has pushed
 the times of pre-historic man millions of years back. (<i>See
 </i>"<i>Pedigree of Man,</i>"<i> </i>p. 273.) Occultists,
 render thanks to science for such corroboration of our claims!
 </p><p>
 ** This seems a poor compliment to pay Geology, which is not a
 speculative but as exact a science as astronomy -- save, perhaps
 its too risky chronological speculations. It is mainly a "Descriptive"
 as opposed to an "Abstract" Science.
 </p><p>
 *** Such newly-coined words as "<i>perigenesis of plastids</i>,"
 "plastidule Souls" (!), and others less comely, invented
 by Haeckel, may be very learned and correct in so far as they
 may express very graphically the ideas in his own vivid fancy.
 As a <i>fact, </i>however, they remain for his less imaginative
 colleagues painfully <i>caenogenetic </i>-- to use his own terminology;
 <i>i.e.</i>, for<i> true</i> Science they are <i>spurious </i>speculations
 so long as they are derived from "empirical sources."
 Therefore, when he seeks to prove that "the origin of man
 from other mammals, and most directly from the catarrhine ape,
 is a <i>deductive law </i>that follows necessarily from <i>the
 inductive </i>law of the theory of descent" ("<i>Anthropogeny,</i>"<i>
 </i>p. 392) -- his no less learned foes (du Bois-Reymond -- for
 one) have a right to see in this sentence a <i>mere jugglery of
 words</i>; a<i> </i>"<i>testimonium paupertatis </i>of natural
 science"<i> -- </i>as he himself complains, calling them,
 in return, <i>ignoramuses </i>(see "Pedigree of Man,"
 Notes).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 664 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 defects or illusions of his own coarser vision, auditory powers,
 and other senses. He has no right to trespass on the grounds of
 metaphysics and psychology. His duty is to verify and to rectify
 all the facts that <i>fall under his direct </i>observation; to
 profit by the experiences and mistakes of the Past in endeavouring
 to trace the working of a certain concatenation of cause and effects,
 which, but only by its constant and unvarying repetition, may
 be called A <strong>L</strong>AW. This it is which a man of science
 is expected to do, if he would become a teacher of men and remain
 true to his original programme of natural or physical sciences.
 Any side-way path from this royal road becomes <i>speculation.</i>
 
 </p><p>
 Instead of keeping to this, what does many a so-called man of
 science do in these days? He rushes into the domains of pure metaphysics,
 while deriding it. He delights in rash conclusions and calls it
 "a <i>deductive </i>law from the <i>inductive </i>law"
 of a theory based upon and drawn out of the depths of his own
 consciousness: that consciousness being perverted by, and honeycombed
 with, one-sided materialism. He attempts to explain the "origin"
 of things, which are yet embosomed only in his own conceptions.
 He attacks spiritual beliefs and religious traditions millenniums
 old, and denounces everything, save his own hobbies, as superstition.
 He suggests theories of the Universe, a Cosmogony developed by
 blind, mechanical forces of nature alone, far more <i>miraculous</i>
 <i>and impossible </i>than even one based upon the assumption
 of <i>fiat lux </i>out of <i>nihil -</i>- and tries to astonish
 the world by such a wild theory; which, being known to emanate
 from a scientific brain, is taken on <i>blind faith </i>as very
 scientific and the outcome of <strong>S</strong>CIENCE.
 </p><p>
 Are those the opponents Occultism would dread? Most decidedly
 not. For such theories are no better treated by <i>real </i>(not
 empirical) Science than our own. Haeckel, hurt in his vanity by
 du Bois-Reymond, never tires of complaining publicly of the latter's
 onslaught on his fantastic theory of descent. Rhapsodizing on
 "the exceedingly rich storehouse of empirical evidence,"
 he calls those "recognised physiologists" who oppose
 every speculation of his drawn from the said "storehouse"
 -- <i>ignorant</i> men. "If many men," he declares --
 "and among them even some scientists of repute -- hold that
 the whole of phylogeny is a castle in the air, and genealogical
 trees (from monkeys?) are empty plays of phantasy, they only in
 speaking thus demonstrate their ignorance of that wealth of <i>empirical
 sources of knowledge </i>to which reference has already been made"
 ("Pedigree of Man," p. 273).
 </p><p>
 We open Webster's Dictionary and read the definitions of the word
 "empirical": "Depending upon experience or observation
 alone, <i>without due regard to modern science and theory.</i>"<i>
 </i>This applies to the Occultists, Spiritualists, Mystics, etc.,
 etc. Again, "an <i>Empiric -- </i>One who confines himself
 to applying the results of his own observations" (only)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 665 MR. HUXLEY APPLIES AN "EXTINGUISHER."
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 (which is Haeckel's case); "one <i>wanting Science </i>.
 . . . an ignorant and unlicensed practitioner; a quack; a CHARLATAN."
 </p><p>
 No Occultist or "magician," has ever been treated to
 any worse epithets. Yet the Occultist remains on his own metaphysical
 grounds, and does not endeavour to rank <i>his knowledge, </i>the
 fruits of <i>his </i>personal observation and experience, among
 the <i>exact </i>sciences of modern learning. He keeps within
 his legitimate sphere, where he is master. But what is one to
 think of a rank materialist, whose duty is clearly traced before
 him, who uses such an expression as this: --
 </p><p>
 "The origin of man from other mammals, and most directly
 from the catarrhine ape, <i>is a deductive law, that follows necessarily
 from the inductive law of the </i><strong>T</strong>HEORY OF <strong>D</strong>ESCENT."
 ("<i>Anthropogeny,</i>"<i> p. </i>392).
 </p><p>
 A "theory" is simply a hypothesis, a speculation, <i>and
 no law. </i>To say otherwise is only one of the many liberties
 taken now-a-days by scientists. They enunciate an absurdity, and
 then hide it behind the shield of Science. Any deduction from
 theoretical speculation is no better than <i>a speculation on
 a speculation. </i>Now Sir W. Hamilton has already shown that
 the word theory is now used "in a very loose and improper
 sense" . . . . "that it is convertible into <i>hypothesis,</i>
 and<i> hypothesis </i>is commonly used as another term for <i>conjecture,
 </i>whereas the terms 'theory' and 'theoretical' are properly
 used in opposition to the term <i>practice </i>and<i> practical.</i>"
 </p><p>
 But modern Science puts an extinguisher on the latter statement,
 and mocks at the idea. Materialistic philosophers and Idealists
 of Europe and America may be agreed with the Evolutionists as
 to the physical origin of man -- yet it will never become a general
 truth with the true metaphysician, and the latter defies the materialists
 to make good their arbitrary assumptions. That the ape-theory
 theme* of Vogt and Darwin, on which the Huxley-Haeckelians have
 composed of late such extraordinary variations, is far less scientific
 -- because clashing with the fundamental laws of that theme itself
 -- than ours can ever be
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The <i>mental </i>barrier between man and ape, characterized
 by Huxley as an "<i>enormous gap, </i>a distance <i>practically
 immeasurable</i>"! !<i> </i>is, indeed, in itself conclusive.
 Certainly it constitutes a standing puzzle to the materialist,
 who relies on the frail reed of "natural selection."
 The physiological differences between Man and the Apes are in
 reality<i> -- </i>despite a curious community of certain features<i>
 -- </i>equally striking. Says Dr. Schweinfurth, one of the most
 cautious and experienced of naturalists: --
 </p><p>
 "In modern times there are no animals in creation that have
 attracted more attention from the scientific student than the
 great quadrumana (the anthropoids), bearing such a striking resemblance
 to the human form as to have justified the epithet of anthropomorphic
 being conferred on them. . . . But <i>all investigation at present
 only leads human</i> <i>intelligence to a confession of its insufficiency</i>;<i>
 </i>and nowhere is caution more to be advocated, <i>nowhere is
 premature judgment more to be deprecated than in the attempt to
 bridge over the </i>MYSTERIOUS CHASM <i>which separates man and
 beast.</i>"<i> </i>"<i>Heart of Africa</i>"<i>
 </i>i., 520.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 666 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 shown to be, is very easy of demonstration. Let the reader only
 turn to the excellent work on "Human Species" by the
 great French naturalist de Quatrefages, and our statement will
 at once be verified.
 </p><p>
 Moreover, between the esoteric teaching concerning the origin
 of man and Darwin's speculations, no man, unless he is a rank
 materialist, will hesitate. This is the description given by Mr.
 Darwin of "the earliest ancestors of man."
 </p><p>
 "They were without doubt once covered with hair; both sexes
 having beards; their ears were pointed and capable of movement;
 <i>and their bodies were provided with a tail, </i>having the
 proper muscles. Their limbs and bodies were acted on by many muscles
 which now only occasionally reappear in man, but which are still
 normally present in the quadrumana. . . . The foot, judging from
 the condition of the great toe in the foetus, was then prehensile,
 and our progenitors, no doubt, were <i>arboreal in their habits,
 </i>frequenting some warm forest-clad land, and the males were
 provided with canine teeth which served as formidable weapons.
 . . ."*
 </p><p>
 Darwin connects him with the type of the tailed catarrhines, "and
 consequently removes him a stage backward in the scale of evolution.
 The English naturalist is not satisfied to take his stand upon
 the ground of his own doctrines, and, like Haeckel, <i>on this
 point places himself in direct variance with one of the fundamental
 laws </i>which constitute the principal charm of Darwinism . .
 . " And then the learned French naturalist proceeds to show
 how this fundamental law is broken. "In fact," he says,
 "in the theory of Darwin, transmutations do not take place,
 either by chance or in every direction. They are ruled by certain
 laws which are due to the organization itself. If an organism
 is once modified in a given direction, it can undergo secondary
 or tertiary transmutations, but will still preserve the impress
 of the original. It is the law of <i>permanent characterization,
 which alone </i>permits Darwin to explain the filiation of groups,
 their characteristics, and their numerous relations. It is by
 virtue of this law that <i>all</i> the descendants of the first
 mollusc have been molluscs; <i>all</i> the descendants of the
 first vertebrate have been vertebrates. It is clear that this
 constitutes one of the foundations of the doctrine. . . . It follows
 that two beings belonging to two distinct types can be referred
 to <i>a common ancestor, </i>but the one cannot be the descendant
 of the other"; (<i>p</i>. 106).
 </p><p>
 "Now man and ape present a very striking contrast in <i>respect
 to type. </i>Their organs . . . correspond almost exactly term
 for term: but these
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * A ridiculous instance of evolutionist contradictions is afforded
 by Schmidt ("<i>Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,</i>"<i>
 </i>on page 292). He says, "Man's kinship with the apes is
 <i>not impugned </i>by the <i>bestial strength </i>of the teeth
 of the male orang or gorilla." Mr. Darwin, on the contrary,
 endows this fabulous being with teeth used as weapons!</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 667 A WALKER OR A CLIMBER.</h6>
 
 <p>
 organs are arranged after a very different plan. In man they are
 so arranged that he is essentially a <i>walker, </i>while in apes
 they necessitate his being a <i>climber</i>. . . . There is here
 an anatomical and mechanical distinction. . . . A glance at the
 page where Huxley has figured side by side a human skeleton and
 the skeletons of the most highly developed apes is a sufficiently
 convincing proof."
 </p><p>
 The consequence of these facts, from the point of view of the
 logical application of the law of <i>permanent characterizations,
 </i>is that man cannot be descended from an ancestor who is already
 characterized as an ape, any more than a catarrhine tailless ape
 can be descended from a tailed catarrhine. A <i>walking animal
 </i>cannot be descended from a <i>climbing </i>one.
 </p><p>
 "Vogt, in placing man among the <i>primates, </i>declares
 without hesitation that <i>the lowest class of apes have passed
 the landmark </i>(the common ancestor), from which the different
 types of this family have originated and diverged." (This
 ancestor of the apes, occult science sees in the lowest human
 group during the Atlantean period, as shown before.) . . . "We
 must, then, place the origin of man beyond the last apes,"
 goes on de Quatrefages, thus corroborating our Doctrine, "if
 we would adhere to one of the laws most emphatically necessary
 to the Darwinian theory. We then come to the prosimiae of Haeckel,
 the loris, indris, etc. But those animals also are climbers; we
 must go further, therefore, in search of our first direct ancestor.
 But the genealogy by Haeckel brings us from the latter to the
 marsupials. . . . From men to the Kangaroo the distance is certainly
 great. Now neither living nor extinct fauna show the intermediate
 types which ought to serve as landmarks. This difficulty causes
 but slight embarrassment to Darwin.* We know that he considers
 the <i>want of information </i>upon similar questions <i>as a
 proof in his favour. </i>Haeckel doubtless is as little embarrassed.
 He admits the existence of an absolutely <i>theoretical pithecoid
 man.</i>"
 </p><p>
 "Thus, since it has been proved that, according to Darwinism
 itself, the origin of man must be placed beyond the eighteenth
 stage, and since it becomes, in consequence, <i>necessary</i>
 to fill up the gap between marsupials and man, will Haeckel admit
 the existence <i>of four unknown intermediate groups </i>instead
 of one?" asks de Quatrefages. "Will he complete his
 genealogy in this manner? It is not for me to answer." ("<i>The
 Human Species,</i>"<i> p. </i>107-108.)
 </p><p>
 But see Haeckel's famous genealogy, in "The Pedigree of Man,"
 called by him "Ancestral Series of Man." In the "Second
 Division"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * According even to a <i>fellow-thinker, </i>Professor Schmidt,
 Darwin has evolved "a certainly not flattering, and perhaps
 in <i>many points an incorrect, </i>portrait of our presumptive
 ancestors in the dawn of humanity." ("<i>Doctrine of
 Descent and Darwinism,</i>"<i> </i>p. 284.)
 </p><h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 668 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (Eighteenth Stage) he describes "Prosimiae, allied to the
 Loris (Stenops) and Makis (Lemur) as without marsupial bones and
 cloaca, but with <i>placenta.</i>"<i> </i>And now turn to
 de Quatrefages' "<i>The Human Species,</i>"<i> pp. </i>109,
 110, and see his proofs, based on the latest discoveries, to show
 that "the prosimiae of Haeckel have no <i>decidua </i>and
 a diffuse placenta." They cannot be the ancestors of the
 apes even, let alone man, according to a fundamental law of Darwin
 himself, as the great French Naturalist shows. But this does not
 dismay the "animal theorists" in the least, for self-contradiction
 and paradoxes are the very soul of modern Darwinism. Witness --
 Mr. Huxley. Having himself shown, with regard to fossil man and
 the "missing link," that "neither in quaternary
 ages nor at the present time <i>does any intermediary being fill
 the gap </i>which separates man from the Troglodyte"; and
 that to "deny the existence of this gap <i>would be as reprehensible
 as absurd,</i>"<i> </i>the great man of Science denies his
 own words <i>in</i> <i>actu </i>by supporting with all the weight
 of his scientific authority that <i>most </i>"absurd"
 of all theories<i> -- </i>the<i> descent of man from an ape!</i>
 
 </p><p>
 "This genealogy," says de Quatrefages, "<i>is wrong
 throughout, </i>and is founded on a material error." Indeed,
 Haeckel bases his descent of man on the 17th and 18th stages (<i>See
 Aveling</i>'<i>s </i>"<i>Pedigree of Man,</i>"<i> p.</i>
 77), the marsupialia and prosimiae<i> -- </i>(genus Haeckelii?).
 Applying the latter term to the <i>Lemuridae -- </i>hence making
 of them animals with a <i>placenta -- he commits </i>a zoological
 blunder. For after having himself divided mammals according to
 their anatomical differences into two groups: the <i>indeciduata,
 </i>which have <i>no decidua </i>(or special membrane uniting
 the placentae), and the <i>deciduata, </i>those who possess it:
 he includes the <i>prosimiae </i>in the latter group. Now we have
 shown elsewhere what other men of science had to say to this.
 As de Quatrefages says, "The anatomical investigations of
 . . . Milne Edwards and Grandidier upon these animals . . . place
 it beyond all doubt that the prosimiae of Haeckel have no decidua
 and a diffuse placenta. They are <i>indeciduata. </i>Far from
 any possibility of their being the ancestors of the apes, according
 to the principles laid down by Haeckel himself, <i>they cannot
 be regarded even as the ancestors of the zonoplacental mammals
 </i>. . . and ought to be connected with the pachydermata, the
 edentata, and the cetacea"; (<i>p</i>. 110). And yet Haeckel's
 inventions pass off with some as <i>exact science!</i> 
 </p><p>
 The above mistake, if indeed, one, is not even hinted at in Haeckel's
 "Pedigree of Man," translated by Aveling. If the excuse
 may stand good that at the time the famous "genealogies"
 were made, "the embryogenesis of the prosimiae was not known,"
 it is familiar now. We shall see whether the next edition of Aveling's
 translation will have this important error rectified, or if the
 17th and 18th stages remain</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 669 A PITHECOID MAN WANTED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 as they are to blind the profane, as one of the <i>real</i> intermediate
 links. But, as the French naturalist observes<i> -- </i>"their
 (Darwin's and Haeckel's) process is always the same, considering
 the <i>unknown </i>as a proof in favour of their theory."
 (<i>Ibid.</i>)
 </p><p>
 It comes to this. Grant to man an immortal Spirit and Soul; endow
 the whole animate and inanimate creation with the monadic principle
 gradually evolving from the latent and passive into active and
 positive polarity -- and Haeckel will not have a leg to stand
 upon, whatever his admirers may say.
 </p><p>
 But there are important divergences even between Darwin and Haeckel.
 While the former makes us proceed from the <i>tailed</i> catarrhine,
 Haeckel traces our hypothetical ancestor to the <i>tailless </i>ape,
 though, at the same time, he places him in a hypothetical "stage"
 immediately preceding this: "<i>Menocerca with tails</i>"<i>
 </i>(19th stage).
 </p><p>
 Nevertheless, we have one thing in common with the Darwinian school:
 it is the law of gradual and extremely slow evolution, embracing
 many million years. The chief quarrel, it appears, is with regard
 to the nature of the primitive "Ancestor." We shall
 be told that the Dhyan Chohan, or the "progenitor" of
 Manu, is a hypothetical being unknown on <i>the physical plane.
 </i>We reply that it was believed in by the whole of antiquity,
 and by nine-tenths of the present humanity; whereas not only is
 the <i>pithecoid man, </i>or "ape-man," a purely hypothetical
 creature of Haeckel's creation, unknown and untraceable on this
 earth, but further its genealogy<i> -- </i>as invented by him<i>
 -- </i>clashes with scientific facts and all the known data of
 modern discovery in Zoology. It is simply absurd, even as a fiction.
 As de Quatrefages demonstrates in a few words, Haeckel "admits
 the existence of an <i>absolutely theoretical pithecoid man</i>"<i>
 -- </i>a hundred times more difficult to accept than any Deva
 ancestor. And it is not the only instance in which he proceeds
 in a similar manner in order to complete his genealogical table;
 and he admits very <i>naively </i>his inventions himself. Does
 he not confess the non-existence of his <i>sozura </i>(14th stage)
 -- a creature entirely <i>unknown to science -- </i>by confessing
 over his own signature, that<i> -- </i>"The proof of its
 existence arises from the necessity of an intermediate type between
 the 13th and the 14th stages"!
 </p><p>
 If so, we might maintain with as much scientific right, that the
 proof of the existence of our three ethereal races, and the three-eyed
 men of the Third and Fourth Root-Races "arises also from
 the necessity of an intermediate type" between the <i>animal
 </i>and the gods. What reason would the Haeckelians have to protest
 in this special case?
 </p><p>
 Of course there is a ready answer: "Because we do not grant
 the presence of the monadic essence." The manifestation of
 the Logos as individual<i> consciousness </i>in the animal and
 human creation is not accepted</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 670 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 by exact science, nor does it cover the whole ground, of course.
 But the failures of science and its arbitrary assumptions are
 far greater on the whole than* any "extravagant" esoteric
 doctrine can ever furnish. Even thinkers of the school of Von
 Hartmann have become tainted with the general epidemic. They accept
 the Darwinian Anthropology (more or less), though they also postulate
 the individual Ego as a manifestation of the Unconscious (the
 Western presentation of the Logos or Primeval Divine Thought).
 They say the evolution of the physical man is from the animal,
 but that mind in its various phases is altogether a thing apart
 from material facts, though organism (as an <i>upadhi</i>)<i>
 is </i>necessary for ITS manifestation.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <b>P</b>LASTIDULAR <b>S</b>OULS, AND <b>C</b>ONSCIOUS <b>N</b>ERVE-CELLS.
 </p><p>
 But one can never see the end of such wonders with Haeckel and
 his school, whom the Occultists and Theosophists have every right
 to consider as materialistic tramps <i>trespassing </i>on private
 metaphysical grounds. Not satisfied with the paternity of <i>Bathybius
 </i>(Haeckelii), "plastidule souls,"** and "atom-souls"
 are now invented by them, on the basis of purely blind <i>mechanical
 </i>forces of matter. We are informed that "the study of
 the evolution of soul-life shows that this has worked its way
 up from the lower stages of the simple <i>cell-soul, </i>through
 an astonishing series of gradual stages in evolution, up <i>to
 the soul of man.</i>"<i> </i>("<i>Present Position of
 Evolution,</i>"<i> </i>p. 266.)
 </p><p>
 "Astonishing"<i> -- </i>truly, based as this wild speculation
 is on the <i>Consciousness </i>of the "nerve cells."
 For as he tells us, "Little as we are in a position, at the
 present time, to explain fully the nature of consciousness,***
 yet the comparative and genetic observation of it clearly shows
 that it is only a higher and more complex <i>function of the nerve
 cells.</i>"<i> </i>(Ibid, note 22.)
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Of course the Esoteric system of Fourth Round Evolution is much
 more complex than the paragraph and quotations referred to categorically
 assert. It is practically a <i>reversal </i>-- both in embryological
 inference and succession in time of species -- of the current
 Western conception.
 </p><p>
 ** According to Haeckel, there are also <i>cell-souls</i>;<i>
 </i>"an inorganic <i>molecular soul</i>"<i> </i>without,
 and a "plastidular soul with (or possessing) memory".
 What are our esoteric teachings to this? The <i>divine and human</i>
 soul of the seven principles in man must, of course, pale and
 give away before such a stupendous revelation!
 </p><p>
 *** A valuable confession, this. Only it makes the attempt to
 trace the <i>descent of </i>Consciousness in man as well as of
 his physical body from <i>Bathybius Haeckelii </i>still more humorous
 and <i>empirical, </i>in the sense of Webster's second definition.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 671 HAECKEL CREATES SOULS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Mr. Herbert Spencer's song on Consciousness<i> -- </i>is sung,
 it seems, and may henceforth be safely stored up in the lumber
 room of obsolete speculations. Where, however, do Haeckel's "complex
 functions" of <i>his </i>scientific "nerve-cells"
 land him? Once more right into the Occult and mystic teachings
 of the Kabala about the descent of souls as conscious and unconscious
 atoms; among the Pythagorean MONAD and the<i> monads </i>of Leibnitz<i>
 -- </i>and the "gods, monads, and atoms" of our esoteric
 teaching;* into the <i>dead letter </i>of Occult teachings, left
 to the <i>amateur </i>Kabalists and professors of ceremonial magic.
 For this is what he says, while explaining his newly-coined terminology:
 --
 </p><p>
 "Plastidule-Souls; the plastidules or protoplasmic molecules,
 the smallest, homogeneous parts of the protoplasm are, on our
 plastic theory, to be regarded as the active factors of all life-functions.
 The plastidular soul differs from the inorganic molecular soul
 <i>in that it</i> <i>possesses memory.</i>"<i> </i>("<i>Pedigree
 of Man,</i>"<i> Note, p. </i>296.)
 </p><p>
 This he develops in his mirific lecture on the "<i>Perigenesis
 of the Plastidule, </i>or the wave-motions of living particles."
 It is an improvement on Darwin's theory of "Pangenesis,"
 and a further approach, a cautious move towards "magic."
 The former is a conjecture that certain of the actual and identical
 atoms which had belonged to ancestral bodies "are thus transmitted
 through their descendants for generation after generation, so
 that we are literally 'flesh of the flesh' of the primeval creature
 who has developed into man in the later . . . period" --
 explains the author of "The Modern Zoroastrian" (<i>in
 </i>"<i>Primitive Polarities,</i>"<i> </i>etc.). The
 latter (Occultism) teaches that<i> -- </i>(<i>a</i>) the life-atoms
 of our (<i>Prana</i>) life-principle are never entirely lost when
 a man dies. That the atoms best impregnated with the life-principle
 (an independent, eternal, conscious factor) are partially transmitted
 from father to son by heredity, and partially are drawn once more
 together and become the animating principle of the new body in
 every new incarnation of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Those who take the opposite view and look upon the existence
 of the human soul,<i> -- </i>"as a supernatural, a spiritual
 phenomenon, conditioned by forces altogether different from <i>ordinary
 physical</i> forces," . . . "mock," he thinks,
 "in consequence, all explanation that is simply scientific."
 They have no right it seems, to assert that "psychology is,
 in part, or in whole, a spiritual science, not a physical one."
 . . . The new discovery by Haeckel (one taught for thousands of
 years in all the Eastern religions, however), that the animals
 have souls, will, and sensation, hence soul-functions, leads him
 to make of psychology the science of the zoologists. The archaic
 teaching that the "Soul" (the animal and human souls,
 or Kama and <i>Manas</i>)<i> </i>"has its developmental history"
 -- is claimed by Haekel as his own discovery and innovation on
 an "untrodden (?) path"! He (Haeckel) will work out
 the comparative evolution of the soul in man and in other animals.
 . . . "The comparative morphology of the soul-organs, and
 the comparative physiology of the soul-functions, both founded
 on Evolution, thus become the psychological (really materialistic)
 problem of the scientific man." (<i>Cell-souls and</i> <i>Soul-cells,
 </i>p. 137, "<i>Pedigree of Man.</i>") </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 672 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Monads. Because (<i>b</i>), as the <i>individual </i>Soul
 is ever the same, so are the atoms of the lower principles (body,
 its astral, or <i>life double, </i>etc<i>.</i>)<i>, </i>drawn
 as they are by affinity and Karmic law always to the same individuality
 in a series of various bodies, etc., etc.*
 </p><p>
 To be just, and, to say the least, <i>logical, </i>our modern
 Haeckelians ought to pass a resolution that henceforth the "Perigenesis
 of the Plastidule," and like lectures, should be bound up
 with those on "Esoteric Buddhism," and "The Seven
 Principles in Man." Thus the public will have a chance, at
 any rate, of judging after comparison which of the two teachings
 is the <i>most </i>or the <i>least </i>ABSURD, even from the standpoint
 of<i> materialistic</i> and<i> exact </i>Science!
 </p><p>
 Now the Occultists, who trace every atom in the universe, whether
 an aggregate or single, to One Unity, or Universal <i>Life</i>;
 who do not recognize that anything in Nature can be <i>inorganic</i>;<i>
 </i>who know of no such thing as <i>dead</i> matter -- the Occultists
 are consistent with their doctrine of Spirit and Soul when speaking
 of <i>memory </i>in every atom, of <i>will and sensation. </i>But
 what can a materialist mean by the qualification? The law of <i>biogenesis,
 </i>in the sense applied to it by the Haeckelians<i> -- </i>"is
 the result of the ignorance on the part of the man of science
 of <i>occult </i>physics." We know and speak of "life-atoms"
 -- and of "sleeping-atoms" -- because we regard these
 two forms of energy -- the kinetic and the potential -- as produced
 by one and the same force or the ONE LIFE, and regard the latter
 as the source and mover of all. But what <i>is it </i>that furnished
 with energy, and especially with <i>memory, </i>the "plastidular
 souls" of Haeckel? The "wave motion of living particles"
 becomes comprehensible on the theory of a Spiritual ONE LIFE,
 of a universal Vital principle independent of <i>our</i> matter,
 and manifesting as <i>atomic energy </i>only on <i>our </i>plane
 of consciousness. It is that which, individualized in the human
 cycle, is transmitted from father to son.
 </p><p>
 Now Haeckel, modifying Darwin's theory, suggests "most plausibly,"
 as the author of the "<i>Modern Zoroastrian</i>"<i>
 </i>thinks, "that not the identical atoms, but their peculiar
 motions and mode of aggregation have been thus transmitted"
 (by heredity).
 </p><p>
 If Haeckel, or any other Scientist, knew more than any of them
 does of the nature of the atom, he would not have improved the
 occasion in this way. For he only states, in a more <i>metaphysical
 language </i>than Darwin, one and the same thing. The life-principle,
 or <i>life energy,</i> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * (<i>See </i>"<i>Transmigration of the Life Atoms,</i>"<i>
 </i>"<i>Five years of Theosophy,</i>"<i> p.</i> 533-539).
 The collective aggregation of these atoms forms thus the <i>Anima
 Mundi </i>of our Solar system, the <i>soul </i>of our little universe,
 each atom of which is of course a <i>soul,</i> a monad, a little
 universe endowed with consciousness, hence with <i>memory </i>(<i>Vol.
 I., Part III., </i>"<i>Gods, Monads and Atoms.</i>")
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page 673]] THE MEANING OF SOUL WITH HAECKEL.
 </p><p>
 which is omnipresent, eternal, indestructible, is a <i>force </i>and
 a PRINCIPLE as<i> noumenon, </i>atoms<i>, as phenomenon. </i>It
 is one and the same thing, and cannot be considered as separate
 except in materialism.*
 </p><p>
 Further, Haeckel enunciates concerning the Atom Souls that which,
 at first sight, appears as occult as a Monad of Leibnitz. "The
 recent contest as to the nature of atoms, which we must regard
 as in some form or other the ultimate factors in all physical
 and chemical processes," he tells us -- "seems to be
 capable of the easiest settlement, by the conception that these
 very minute masses possess, as centres of force, <i>a persistent
 soul, that every atom has sensation </i>and the power of movement."
 </p><p>
 He does not say a word concerning the fact that this is Leibnitz's
 theory, and one pre-eminently occult. Nor does he understand the
 term "Soul" as we do; for, with Haeckel it is simply,
 along with consciousness, the production of the grey matter of
 the brain, a thing which, as the "cell-soul, is as indissolubly
 bound up with the protoplasmic body as is the <i>human soul with
 the brain and spinal cord.</i>"<i> </i>(<i>Ibid.</i>)<i>
 </i>He rejects the conclusions of Kant, Herbert Spencer, of du
 Bois-Reymond and Tyndall. The latter expresses the opinion of
 all the great men of science, as of the greatest thinkers of this
 and the past ages, in saying that "the passage from the physics
 of the brain <i>to the corresponding facts of Consciousness is
 unthinkable. </i>Were our minds and senses so . . . illuminated
 as to enable us to see and feel the very molecules of the brain;
 were we capable of following all their motions, all their groupings
 . . . electric discharges . . . we should be as far as ever from
 the solution of the problem . . . <i>The chasm between the two
 classes of Phenomena would still remain intellectually impassable.</i>"<i>
 </i>But the complex function of the nerve-cells of the great German
 EMPIRIC, or, in other words, his Consciousness, will not permit
 him to follow the conclusions of the greatest thinkers of our
 globe. <i>He is greater than they. </i>He asserts this, and <i>protests
 </i>against all. "No one has the right
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In "<i>The Transmigration of the Life-Atoms,</i>"<i>
 </i>we say, to explain better a position which is but too often
 misunderstood: -- "It is <i>omnipresent </i>. . . . though
 (on this plane of manifestation) often in a dormant state<i> --
 </i>as in stone. The definition which states that when this indestructible
 force is disconnected with one set of atoms (<i>molecules ought</i>
 <i>to</i> have been said) it becomes immediately attracted by
 others, does not imply that it entirely abandons the first set
 (because the atoms themselves would then disappear), but only
 that it transfers its <i>vis viva</i>, or life power<i> -- </i>the
 energy of motion, to another set. But because it manifests itself
 in the next set as what is called Kinetic energy, it does not
 follow that the first set is deprived of it altogether; for it
 is still in it, as potential energy or life latent," etc.,
 etc. Now what can Haeckel mean by his "not identical atoms
 but their peculiar motion and mode of aggregation," if it
 is not the same <i>Kinetic </i>energy we have been explaining?
 He must have read Paracelsus and studied "Five Years of Theosophy,"
 without properly digesting the teachings, before evolving such
 theories.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 674 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 to hold that in the future <i>we</i> (Haeckel) shall not be able
 to pass beyond those limits of our knowledge that to day seem
 impassable"; and he quotes from Darwin's introduction to
 the "Descent of Man" these words, which he modestly
 applies to his scientific opponents and himself: "It is always
 those <i>who know little, </i>and not those who <i>know much,
 </i>that positively affirm that this or that problem will never
 be solved by Science."
 </p><p>
 The world may rest satisfied. That day is not far off when the
 "thrice great" Haeckel will have shown (to his own satisfaction)
 that the consciousness of Sir I. Newton was, physiologically speaking,
 but the reflex action (or <i>minus </i>consciousness) caused by
 the <i>peri-genesis </i>of<i> </i>the plastidules of our common
 ancestor and old friend, the <i>Moneron Haeckelii. </i>The fact
 that the said "Bathybius" has been found out and <i>exposed
 </i>as a pretender simulating the organic substance <i>it was
 not</i>;<i> </i>and since, among the children of men, Lot's wife
 alone (and even this, only after her disagreeable metamorphosis
 into a salt pillar) could claim the pinch of salt <i>it is, </i>as
 her forefather -- will not dismay him at all. He will go on asserting,
 as coolly as he has always done, that it was no more than the
 peculiar mode and motion of the ghost of the long-vanished atoms
 of our "Father Bathybius," which, transmitted across
 aeons of time into the cell-tissue of the grey matter of the brains
 of every great man, caused Sophocles and AEschylus, as well as
 Shakespeare, to write their tragedies, Newton, his "Principia,"
 Humboldt, his "Cosmos," etc. etc. It prompted Haeckel
 to invent Graeco-Latin names three inches long, pretending to
 mean a good deal, and meaning -- nothing.
 </p><p>
 Of course we are quite aware that the true, honest evolutionist
 agrees with us; and that he is the first to say that not only
 is the geological record imperfect, but that there are enormous
 gaps in the series of hitherto discovered fossils, which can never
 be filled. He will tell us, moreover, that "no evolutionist
 assumes that man is descended <i>from any existing ape or any
 extinct ape either,</i>"<i> </i>but that man and apes originated
 <i>probably </i>aeons back, in some common root stock. Still,
 as de Quatrefages points out, he will claim as an evidence corroborating
 his (the evolutionist's) claim, even this wealth of absent proofs,
 saying that "all living forms have not been preserved in
 the fossil series, the chances of preservation being few and far
 between," even primitive man "burying or <i>burning
 </i>his dead" (A. Wilson). This is just what we ourselves
 claim. It is just as<i> possible </i>that future should have in
 store for us the discovery of the giant skeleton of an Atlantean,
 30ft. high, as the fossil of a pithecoid "missing link":
 only the former is more <i>probable.</i> 
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-3-03.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>