<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 263 MILLIONS OF YEARS HENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK24">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd2-1-14.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><p>
 <strong>A</strong> <strong>P</strong>ANORAMIC <strong>V</strong>IEW
 OF THE <strong>E</strong>ARLY <strong>R</strong>ACES.
 </p><p>
 There is a period of a few millions of years to cover between
 the first "mindless" race and the highly intelligent
 and <em>intellectual </em>later "Lemurians"; there is
 another between the earliest civilization of the Atlanteans and
 the historic period.
 </p><p>
 As witnesses to the Lemurians but a few silent records in the
 shape of half a dozen broken colossi and old cyclopean ruins are
 left. These are not allowed a hearing, as they are "productions
 of blind natural forces," we are assured by some; "quite
 modern" we are told by others. Tradition is left contemptuously
 unnoticed by sceptic and materialist, and made subservient to
 the Bible in every case by the too zealous Churchman. Whenever
 a legend, however, refuses to fit in with the Noachian "deluge
 theory," it is declared by the Christian clergy "the
 insanely delirious voice of old superstition." Atlantis is
 denied, when not confused with Lemuria and other departed continents,
 because, perhaps, Lemuria is half the creation of modern science,
 and has, therefore, to be believed in; while Plato's Atlantis
 is regarded by most of the scientists as a dream.
 </p><p>
 Atlantis is often described by believers in Plato as a prolongation
 of Africa. An old continent is also suspected to have existed
 on the Eastern coast. Only Africa, as a continent, was never part
 and parcel of either Lemuria or Atlantis, as we have agreed to
 call the Third and Fourth Continents. Their archaic appellations
 are never mentioned in the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 264 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Puranas, nor anywhere else. But with simply one of the esoteric
 keys in hand it becomes an easy task to identify these departed
 lands in the numberless "lands of the gods," Devas and
 Munis described in the Puranas, in their <em>Varshas, Dwipas,</em>
 and<em> zones. </em>Their Sweta-Dwipa, during the early day of
 Lemuria, stood out like a giant-peak from the bottom of the sea;
 the area between Atlas and Madagascar being occupied by the waters
 till about the early period of Atlantis (after the disappearance
 of Lemuria), when Africa emerged from the bottom of the ocean,
 and Atlas was half-sunk.
 </p><p>
 It is of course impossible to attempt, within the compass of even
 several volumes, a consecutive and detailed account of the evolution
 and progress of the first three races -- except so far as to give
 a general view of it, as will be done presently. Race the first
 had no history of its own. Of race the second the same may be
 said. We shall have, therefore, to pay careful attention only
 to the Lemurians and the Atlanteans before the history of our
 own race (the Fifth) can be attempted.
 </p><p>
 What is known of other continents, besides our own, and what does
 history know or accept of the early races? Everything outside
 the repulsive speculations of materialistic science is daubed
 with the contemptuous term "Superstition." The wise
 men of to-day will believe nothing. Plato's "winged"
 and <em>hermaphrodite </em>races, and his golden age, under the
 reign of Saturn and the gods, are quietly brought back by Haeckel
 to their <em>new</em> place in nature: our divine races are shown
 to be the descendants of Catarrhine apes, and our ancestor, a
 piece of sea slime.
 </p><p>
 Nevertheless, as expressed by Faber, "the <em>fictions </em>of
 ancient poetry . . . . will be found to comprehend some portion
 of historical truth." However one-sided the efforts of the
 learned author of the "<em>Mysteries of the Kabiri,</em>"<em>
 --</em> efforts directed throughout his two volumes to constrain
 the classical myths and symbols of old paganism, "to bear
 testimony to the truth of Scripture," -- time and further
 research have avenged, partially at least, that "truth"
 by showing it <em>unveiled. </em>Thus it is the clever adaptations
 of Scripture, on the contrary, which are made to bear evidence
 to the great wisdom of archaic paganism. This, notwithstanding
 the inextricable confusion into which the truth about the Kabiri
 -- the most mysterious gods of antiquity -- was thrown by the
 wild and contradictory speculations of Bishop Cumberland, Dr.
 Shuckford, Cudworth, Vallancey, etc., etc., and finally by Faber.
 Nevertheless, all, from first to last, of these scholars had to
 come to a certain conclusion framed by the latter. "We have
 no reason to think," he writes, "that the idolatry of
 the Gentile world was of a merely arbitrary contrivance; on the
 contrary, it seems to have been built, almost universally, <em>upon
 a traditional remembrance of certain real events. These events
 I apprehend to be the destruction of</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 265 BAILLY AND FABER.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>the first </em>(the fourth in esoteric teachings) <em>Race
 of mankind by the waters of the Deluge.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Chap.
 I. p. </em>9). To this, Faber adds: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "I am persuaded that the tradition of the sinking of the
 Phlegian isle is the very same as that of the sinking of the island
 Atlantis. They both appear to me to allude to one great event,
 the sinking of the whole world beneath the waters of the deluge,
 or, if we suppose the arch of the earth to have remained in its
 original position, the rising of the central water above it. M.
 Bailly, indeed, in his work upon the Atlantis of Plato, the object
 of which is evidently to depreciate the authority of Scriptural
 chronology, labours to prove that the Atlanteans were a very ancient
 northern nation, long prior to the Hindoos, the Phoenicians, and
 the Egyptians." (<i>"A Dissertation on the Kabiri,"
 p. </i>284.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 In this Faber is in agreement with Bailly, who shows himself more
 learned and intuitional than those who accept Biblical chronology.
 Nor is the latter wrong when saying that the Atlanteans were the
 same as the Titans and the giants.<em> </em>(<em>See </em>"<em>Lettres
 sur l</em>'<em>Atlantide.</em>") Faber adopts the more willingly
 the opinion of his French <em>confrere, </em>as Bailly mentions
 Cosmas Indico-Pleustes, who preserved an ancient tradition about
 Noah -- that he "formerly inhabited the <em>island </em>Atlantis"
 (<em>ibid</em>). This island, whether it was the "Poseidonis"
 mentioned in "Esoteric Buddhism," or the Continent of
 Atlantis, does not much matter. The tradition is there, recorded
 by a Christian.
 </p><p>
 No Occultist would ever think of dispossessing Noah of his prerogatives,
 if he is claimed to be an Atlantean; for this would simply show
 that the Israelites repeated the story of Vaivasvata Manu, Xisuthrus,
 and so many others, and that they only changed the name, to do
 which they had the same right as any other nation or tribe. What
 we object to is the literal acceptation of Biblical chronology,
 as it is absurd, and in accord with neither geological data nor
 reason. Moreover, if Noah was an Atlantean, then he was a Titan,
 a giant, as Faber shows; and if a giant, then why is he not shown
 as such in <em>Genesis?* </em>
 </p><p>
 Bailly's mistake was to reject the submersion of Atlantis, and
 to call the Atlanteans simply a Northern and <em>post diluvian
 </em>nation, which, however, as he says, certainly "flourished
 before the foundation of the Hindu, the Egyptian, and the Phoenician
 empires." In this, had
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This is shown by Faber, again a pious Christian, who says that
 "the Noetic family also . . . bore the appellations of <em>Atlanteans
 </em>and <em>Titans, </em>and the great patriarch himself was
 called by way of eminence <em>Atlas </em>and <em>Titan.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Vol. II. p. </em>285). And if so, then, <em>according
 to the Bible, </em>Noah must have been the progeny of the Sons
 of God, the <em>fallen</em> <em>angels, </em>agreeably to the
 same authority, and of the "daughters of men who were fair,"
 (<em>See Genesis, chap. </em>vi.) And why not, since his father
 Lamech slew a man, and was, with all his sons and daughters (who
 perished in the Deluge), as bad as the rest of mankind?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 266 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 he only known of the existence of what we have agreed to call
 <em>Lemuria, </em>he would have again been right. For the Atlanteans
 were <em>post diluvian </em>to the Lemurians, and Lemuria was
 not submerged as Atlantis was, but was <em>sunk </em>under the
 waves, owing to earthquakes and subterranean fires, as Great Britain
 and Europe will be one day. It is the ignorance of our men of
 science, who will accept neither the tradition that several continents
 have already sunk, nor the periodical law which acts throughout
 the Manvantaric cycle -- it is this ignorance that is the chief
 cause of all the confusion. Nor is Bailly wrong again in assuring
 us that the Hindus, Egyptians, and Phoenicians came after the
 Atlanteans, for the latter belonged to the Fourth, while the Aryans
 and their Semitic Branch are of the Fifth Race. Plato, while repeating
 the story as narrated to Solon by the priests of Egypt, intentionally
 confuses (as every <em>Initiate </em>would) the two continents,
 and assigns to the small island which sunk last all the events
 pertaining to the two enormous continents, the prehistoric and
 traditional. Therefore, he describes the <em>first couple, </em>from
 whom the whole island was peopled, as being formed of the Earth.
 In saying so, he means neither Adam and Eve, nor yet his own Hellenic
 forefathers. His language is simply allegorical, and by alluding
 to "Earth," he means "matter," as the Atlanteans
 were really the first purely <em>human </em>and<em> terrestrial
 </em>race -- those that preceded it being more divine and ethereal
 than human and solid.
 </p><p>
 Yet Plato must have known, as would any other initiated adept,
 about the history of the Third Race after its "Fall,"
 though as one pledged to silence and secrecy he never showed his
 knowledge in so many words. Nevertheless, it may become easier
 now, after acquainting oneself with even the approximate chronology
 of the Eastern nations -- all of which was based upon, and followed
 the early Aryan calculations -- to realize the immense periods
 of time that must have elapsed since the separation of the sexes,
 without mentioning the First or even the Second Root-Races. As
 these must remain beyond the comprehension of minds trained in
 Western thought, it is found useless to speak in detail of the
 First and Second, and even of the Third Race in its earliest stage.*
 One has to begin with the latter, when it reached its full human
 period, lest the uninitiated reader should find himself hopelessly
 bewildered.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In that wonderful volume of Donnelly's "Atlantis, the Antediluvian
 World," the author, speaking of the Aryan colonies from Atlantis,
 and of the arts and sciences the legacy of our Fourth Race --
 bravely announces that "the roots of the institutions of
 to-day reach back to the Miocene age." This is an enormous
 allowance for a modern scholar to make; but civilization dates
 still further back than the Miocene Atlanteans. "Secondary-period"
 man will be discovered, and with him his long forgotten civilization.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 267 THE NATURAL "FALL."</h6>
 
 <p>
 The THIRD RACE FELL -- and created no longer: it <em>begot </em>its
 progeny. Being still mindless at the period of separation it begot,
 moreover, anomalous offspring, until its physiological nature
 had adjusted its instincts in the right direction. Like the "lords
 the gods" of the Bible ' the "Sons of Wisdom,"
 the Dhyan-Chohans, had warned them to leave alone the fruit forbidden
 by Nature: but the warning proved of no value. Men realized the
 unfitness -- we must not say sin -- of what they had done, only
 when too late: after the angelic monads from higher spheres had
 incarnated in, and endowed them with understanding. To that day
 they had remained simply physical, like the animals generated
 from them. For what is the distinction? The doctrine teaches that
 the only difference between animate and inanimate objects on earth,
 between an animal and a human frame, is that in some the various
 "fires" are latent, and in others they are active. The
 <em>vital fires </em>are in all things and not an atom is devoid
 of them. But no animal has the three higher principles awakened
 in him; they are simply potential, latent, and thus <em>non-existing.
 </em>And so would the animal frames of men be to this day, had
 they been left as they came out from the bodies of their Progenitors,
 whose <em>shadows </em>they were, to grow, unfolded only by the
 powers and forces immanent in matter. But as said in <strong>P</strong>YMANDER:
 --
 </p><p>
 "This is a Mystery that to this day was sealed and hidden.
 Nature* being mingled with Man** brought forth a wondrous miracle;
 the harmonious commingling <em>of the essence of the Seven </em>(Pitris,
 governors) and her own; the <em>Fire </em>and the <em>Spirit </em>and
 Nature (the noumenon of matter); which (commingling) forthwith
 brought forth seven men of opposite sexes (negative and positive)
 according to the essences of the seven governors." (<em>Divine
 Pymander, Chap. I., Sect. </em>16.)
 </p><p>
 Thus saith Hermes, the thrice great Initiate,*** "the Power
 of the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Nature is the <em>natural </em>body, the shadow of the Progenitors;
 and --
 </p><p>
 ** MAN is the "Heavenly man," as already stated.
 </p><p>
 *** The "Pymander" of our museums and libraries is an
 abridgement of one of the Books of Thoth, by a Platonist of Alexandria.
 In the Third Century it was remodelled after old Hebrew and Phoenician
 <strong>MSS</strong>. by a Jewish Kabalist, and called the "Genesis
 of Enoch." But even its disfigured remnants show how closely
 its text agrees with the Archaic Doctrine, as is shown in the
 creation of the Seven Creators and <em>seven primitive men</em>.
 As to Enoch, Thoth or Hermes, Orpheus and Kadmus, these are all
 generic names, branches and offshoots of the seven primordial
 sages (incarnated Dhyan Chohans or Devas, in <em>illusive, </em>not
 mortal bodies) who taught Humanity all it knew, and whose earliest
 disciples assumed their master's names. This custom passed from
 the Fourth to the Fifth Race. Hence the sameness of the traditions
 about Hermes (of whom Egyptologists count five) Enoch, etc., they
 are all inventors of letters; none of them dies but still lives,
 and they are the first Initiators into, and Founders of the Mysteries.
 <em>The Genesis of Enoch </em>disappeared only very lately among
 the Kabalists. Guillaume [[Footnote continued on next page]] 
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 268 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Thought Divine." St. Paul, another Initiate, called our world
 "the enigmatical mirror of pure truth," and St. Gregory,
 of Nazianzen, corroborated Hermes by stating that "things
 visible are but the shadow and delineation of things that we cannot
 see." It is an eternal combination, and images are repeated
 from the higher rung of the ladder of being down to the lower.
 The "Fall of the Angels," and the "War in Heaven"
 are repeated on every plane, the lower "mirror" disfiguring
 the image of the superior mirror, and each repeating it in its
 own way. Thus the Christian dogmas are but the reminiscences of
 the <em>paradigms </em>of Plato, who spoke of these things cautiously,
 as every Initiate would. But it is all as expressed in these few
 sentences of the <em>Desatir: -</em>-
 </p><p>
 "All that is on Earth, saith the Lord (Ormazd), is the <em>shadow
 of something that is in the superior spheres. </em>This luminous
 object (light, fire, etc.) is the shadow of that which is still
 more luminous than itself, and so on till it reaches ME, who am
 the light of lights."
 </p><p>
 In the Kabalistic books, and in the <em>Zohar </em>pre-eminently,
 the idea that everything objective on earth or in this Universe
 is the Shadow -- <em>Dyooknah</em> -- of the eternal Light or
 Deity, is very strong.
 </p><p>
 The Third Race was pre-eminently the bright shadow, at first,
 of the gods, whom tradition exiles on Earth after the allegorical
 war in Heaven; which became still more allegorical on Earth, for
 it was the war between spirit and matter. This war will last till
 the inner and divine man adjusts his outer terrestrial self to
 his own spiritual nature. Till then the dark and fierce passions
 of the former will be at eternal feud with his master, the Divine
 Man. But the <em>animal </em>will be tamed one day, because its
 nature will be changed, and harmony will reign once more between
 the two as before the "Fall," when even mortal man was<em>
 created </em>by the Elements and was not born.
 </p><p>
 The above is made clear in all the great theogonies, principally
 in the Grecian (<em>see Hesiod and Theogony</em>)<em>. The mutilation</em>
 of<em> Uranos </em>by his son <em>Kronos, </em>who thus condemns
 him to impotency, has never been understood by the modern Mythographers.
 Yet, it is very plain; and having been universal* (<em>vide foot
 note infra</em>)<em>, </em>it must have contained a great abstract
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] Postel saw it. It was
 most certainly in a great measure a transcript from the books
 of Hermes, and far anterior to the Books of Moses, as Eliphas
 Levi tells his readers.
 </p><p>
 * Uranos is a modified Varuna, "the Universal encompasser,"
 the all-embracer, and one of the oldest of the Vedic deities --
 <strong>S</strong>PACE, the maker of Heaven and Earth, since both
 are manifested out of his (or its) seed. It is only later that
 Varuna became the chief of the Adityas and a kind of Neptune riding
 on the <em>Leviathan -- Makara, </em>now the most sacred and mysterious
 of the signs of the Zodiac. Varuna, "without whom no creature
 can even wink," was degraded like Uranos, and, like him,
 <em>he fell into generation, </em>his functions, "the grandest
 cosmical functions," as Muir calls them, having been lowered
 down from heaven to earth by exoteric anthropomorphism. As the
 same [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 269 THE SYMBOLISM OF KRONOS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and philosophical idea, now lost to our modern sages. This punishment
 in the allegory marks, indeed "a new period, a second phase
 in the development of creation," as justly remarked by Decharme
 (<em>Mythologie de la Grece Antique, p. </em>7), who, however,
 renounces the attempt to explain it. Uranos has tried to oppose
 an impediment to that development, or natural evolution, by <em>destroying
 all his children as soon as born. Uranos, </em>who personifies
 all the creative powers of, and in, <em>Chaos </em>(Space, or
 the unmanifested Deity) is thus made to pay the penalty; for it
 is those powers which cause the <em>Pitris </em>to evolve primordial
 <em>men</em> from themselves -- as, later on, these men evolve
 <em>their </em>progeny -- without any sense or desire for procreation.
 The work of generation, suspended during a moment, passes into
 the hands of <em>Kronos,* time, </em>who unites himself with <em>Rhea
 </em>(the earth in esotericism -- matter in general), and thus
 produces, after celestial -- terrestrial Titans. The whole of
 this symbolism relates to the mysteries of Evolution.
 </p><p>
 This allegory is the exoteric version of the esoteric doctrine
 given in this part of our work. For in <em>Kronos </em>we see
 the same story repeated again. As Uranos destroyed his children
 from <em>Gaia </em>(one, in the world of manifestation, with Aditi
 or the Great Cosmic Deep) by confining them in the bosom of the
 Earth, <em>Tythea, so Kronos </em>at this second stage of creation
 destroyed his children from <em>Rhea -- </em>by devouring them.
 This is an allusion to the fruitless efforts of Earth or Nature
 alone to create real <em>human</em> men. (<em>See our Stanzas
 III. -- X., et seq., and also Berosus</em>'<em> account of primeval
 creation.</em>) Time swallows its own fruitless work. Then comes
 Zeus -- Jupiter, who dethrones his father in his turn.** Jupiter
 the Titan, is Prometheus, in one sense,*** and varies from Zeus,
 the Great
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] Orientalist says, "The
 attributes ascribed to Varuna (in the Vedas) impart to his character
 a moral elevation and sanctity far surpassing that attributed
 to any other Vedic Deity." But to understand correctly the
 reason of his fall, like that of Uranos, one has to see in every
 exoteric religion the imperfect and sinful work of man's fancy,
 and also to study the mysteries which Varuna is said to have imparted
 to Vasishta. Only . . . "his secrets and those of Mitra <em>are
 not to be revealed to the foolish.</em>"
 </p><p>
 <em>* Kronos </em>is not only [[<em>Chronos</em>]],<em> time</em>,
 but also, as Breal showed in his <em>Hercule et Cacus </em>(p.
 57), comes from the root <em>Kar</em>, "to make, to create."
 Whether Breal and Decharme, who quotes him, are as right in saying
 that in the Vedas <em>Kronan </em>is a creative god, we have our
 doubts. Breal probably meant Karma, or rather Visva-Karma, the
 creative god, the "Omnificent" and the "great Architect
 of the world."
 </p><p>
 ** The Titanic struggle, in theogony at least, is the fight for
 supremacy between the children of <em>Uranos </em>and <em>Gaia
 </em>(or Heaven and Earth in their abstract sense), the Titans,
 against the children of <em>Kronos, </em>whose chief is Zeus.
 It is the everlasting struggle going on to this day between the
 spiritual inner man and the man of flesh, in one sense.
 </p><p>
 *** Just as the "Lord God," or Jehovah, is Cain esoterically,
 and the "tempting serpent" as well, the male portion
 of the androgynous Eve, before her "Fall;" the female
 portion of Adam Kadmon; the left side or Binah of the right side
 Chochmah in the first Sephirothal Triad.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 270 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "Father of the Gods." He is the "disrespectful
 son" in Hesiod. Hermes calls him the "Heavenly man"
 (Pymander); and even in the Bible he is found again under the
 name of Adam, and, later on -- by transmutation -- under that
 of Ham. Yet these are all personifications of the "sons of
 Wisdom." The necessary corroboration that Jupiter belongs
 to the purely <em>human Atlantean cycle -- if Uranus</em> and<em>
 Kronos </em>who precede him are found insufficient -- may be found
 in Hesiod, who tells us that the Immortals have made men and created
 the Golden and the Silver age (First and Second Races); while
 Jupiter created the generations of Bronze (an admixture of <em>two
 </em>elements), of Heroes, and the men of the age of Iron. After
 this he sends his fatal present, by Pandora, to Epimetheus,* which
 present Hesiod calls "a fatal gift," or the <em>first
 woman. </em>It was a punishment, he explains, sent to man "for
 the theft of divine creative fire." Her apparition on earth
 is the signal of every kind of evil. Before her appearance, the
 human races lived happy, exempt from sickness and suffering --
 as the same races are made to live under Yima's rule, in the Mazdean
 <em>Vendidad.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Two deluges may also be traced in universal tradition by carefully
 comparing Hesiod, the Rig Veda, the Zend-Avesta, etc., while no
 <em>first </em>man is ever mentioned in any of the theogonies
 save the Bible.** Everywhere the man of <em>our race </em>appears
 after a cataclysm of water, after which tradition mentions only
 the several designations of continents and islands which sink
 under the ocean waves in due time.*** "Gods and mortals have
 one common origin" says Hesiod (<em>ibid. v</em>. 108); and
 Pindar echoes the statement (<em>Nem. VI., </em>1). Deucalion
 and Pyrrha, who escape the Deluge by constructing an ark like
 Noah's (<em>see Apollod.,</em> 1, 7, 2,<em> and Ovid, Metam. </em>I,
 260, 899.), ask Jupiter to re-animate the human race whom he had
 made to perish under the waters of the Flood. In the Slavonian
 Mythology (<em>Lithuanian legend, in Grimm, Deutsche Myth. </em>1,
 545), all men were drowned, and two old people, a man and his
 wife, alone remained. Then <em>Pram-gimas </em>(the "master
 of all") advised them to jump <em>seven times </em>on the
 rocks of the earth, and <em>seven new races </em>(couples) were
 born, from which came the nine Lithuanian tribes. As well understood
 by the author of the <em>Mythologie de la Grece Antique -- </em>the<em>
 </em>four ages
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In the Egyptian legend, translated by M. Maspero (the ex-director
 of the Bulaq Museum), called the "two Brothers," the
 original of Pandora is given. <em>Noum, </em>the famous heavenly
 artist, creates a marvellous beauty, a girl which he sends to
 <em>Batoo, </em>after which the happiness of the latter is destroyed.
 Batoo is man, and the girl Eve, of course.<em> </em>(<em>See Maspero</em>'<em>s
 Egyptian Legends, and also Decharme</em>'<em>s </em>"<em>Mythologie
 de la Grece Antique.</em>")
 </p><p>
 ** Yima is not the "first man" in the <em>Vendidad,
 </em>but only in the theories of the Orientalists. -- See further
 on.
 </p><p>
 *** Boeotia, then ancient Athens, and Eleusis were submerged.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 271 THE RACES IN GREEK MYTHOLOGY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 signify periods of time, and are also an allegorical allusion
 to the races. "The successive races, destroyed and replaced
 by others," he says, "without any period of transition,
 are characterized in Greece by the name of metals, to express
 their ever-decreasing value. Gold, the most brilliant and precious
 of all, symbol of purity . . . . qualifies the first race. . .
 . . The men of the second race, those of the age of Silver, are
 already inferior to the first. Inert and weak creatures, all their
 life is no better than a long and stupid infancy. . . . They disappear.
 . . . The men of the age of Bronze are robust and violent (the
 third race); their strength is extreme. They had arms made of
 bronze, habitations of bronze; used nought but bronze. Iron, the
 black metal, was yet unknown" (<em>Op. at D., </em>143-155).
 The fourth generation (race) is, with Hesiod, that of the heroes
 who fell before Thebes (see "<em>The Seven Against Thebes,</em>"<em>
 </em>by AEschylus), or under the walls of Troy.
 </p><p>
 Thus, the four races being found mentioned by the oldest Greek
 poets, though very much confused anachronistically, our doctrines
 are once more corroborated by the classics. But this is all "Mythology"
 and poetry. What can modern science have to say to such an euhemerization
 of old fictions? The verdict is not difficult to foresee. Therefore
 an attempt must be made to answer by anticipation, and prove that
 fictions and <em>empirical </em>speculations are so much of the
 domain of that same science, that none of the men of learning
 have the slightest right, with such a heavy beam in their own
 eye, to point to the speck in the eye of the Occultist, even if
 that speck be not a figment of our opponents' imagination.
 </p><p>
 ---------
 </p><h4><a name="stanza">S</a>TANZA X. -- (<i>Continued.</i>) </h4>
 
 <p>
 40. <strong>T</strong>HEN THE THIRD AND FOURTH (<em>races</em>)<em>
 </em>BECAME TALL WITH PRIDE. <strong>W</strong>E ARE THE KINGS,
 WE ARE THE GODS (<em>a</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 41. <strong>T</strong>HEY TOOK WIVES FAIR TO LOOK AT. <strong>W</strong>IVES
 FROM THE "MINDLESS," THE NARROW-HEADED. <strong>T</strong>HEY
 BRED MONSTERS, WICKED DEMONS, MALE AND FEMALE. <strong>A</strong>LSO
 <strong>K</strong>HADO (<em>Dakini</em>) WITH LITTLE MINDS (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 42. <strong>T</strong>HEY BUILT TEMPLES FOR HUMAN BODY. <strong>M</strong>ALE
 AND <strong>F</strong>EMALE THEY WORSHIPPED (<em>c</em>). <strong>T</strong>HEN
 THE THIRD EYE ACTED NO LONGER (<em>d</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) Such were the first truly physical men, whose first
 characteristic was -- pride! It is the Third Race and the gigantic
 Atlanteans, the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 272 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 memory of whom lingered from one generation and race to another
 generation and race down to the days of Moses, and which found
 an objective form in those antediluvian giants, those terrible
 sorcerers and magicians, of whom the Roman Church has preserved
 such vivid and at the same time distorted legends. One who has
 read and studied the Commentaries on the archaic doctrine, will
 easily recognise in some Atlanteans, the prototypes of the Nimrods,
 the Builders of the Tower of Babel, the Hamites, and all these
 <em>tutti quanti </em>of "accursed memory," as theological
 literature expresses it: of those, in short, who have furnished
 posterity with the orthodox types of Satan. And this leads us
 naturally to inquire into the religious ethics of these early
 races, mythical as these may be.
 </p><p>
 What was the religion of the Third and Fourth Races? In the common
 acceptation of the term, neither the Lemurians, nor yet their
 progeny, the Lemuro-Atlanteans, had any, as they knew no dogma,
 nor had they to believe <em>on faith. </em>No sooner had the mental
 eye of man been opened to understanding, than the Third Race felt
 itself one with the ever-present as the ever to be unknown and
 invisible ALL, the One Universal Deity. Endowed with divine powers,
 and feeling in himself his <em>inner </em>God, each felt he was
 a Man-God in his nature, though an animal in his physical Self.
 The struggle between the two began from the very day they tasted
 of the fruit of the Tree of Wisdom; a struggle for life between
 the spiritual and the psychic, the psychic and the physical. Those
 who conquered the lower principles by obtaining mastery over the
 body, joined the "Sons of Light." Those who fell victims
 to their lower natures, became the slaves of Matter. From "Sons
 of Light and Wisdom" they ended by becoming the "Sons
 of Darkness." They had fallen in the battle of mortal life
 with Life immortal, and all those so fallen became the seed of
 the future generations of Atlanteans.*
 </p><p>
 At the dawn of his consciousness, the man of the Third Root Race
 had thus no beliefs that could be called <em>religion. </em>That
 is to say, he was equally as ignorant of "gay religions,
 full of pomp and gold" as of any system of faith or outward
 worship. But if the term is to be defined as the binding together
 of the masses in one form of reverence paid to those we feel higher
 than ourselves, of piety -- as a feeling expressed by a child
 toward a loved parent -- then even the earliest Lemurians had
 a religion -- and a most beautiful one -- from the very beginning
 of their intellectual life. Had they not their bright gods of
 the elements around
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The name is used here in the sense of, and as a synonym of "sorcerers."
 The Atlantean races were many, and lasted in their evolution for
 millions of years: all were not bad. They became so toward their
 end, as we (the fifth) are fast becoming now.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 273 THE GOLDEN AGE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 them, and even within themselves?* Was not their childhood passed
 with, nursed and tendered by those who had given them life and
 called them forth to intelligent, conscious life? We are assured
 it was so, and we believe it. For the evolution of Spirit into
 matter could never have been achieved; nor would it have received
 its first impulse, had not the bright Spirits sacrificed their
 own respective super-ethereal essences to animate the man of clay,
 by endowing each of his inner principles with a portion, or rather,
 a reflection of that essence. The Dhyanis of the Seven Heavens
 (the seven planes of Being) are the NOUMENOI of the actual and
 the future Elements, just as the Angels of the Seven Powers of
 nature - the grosser effects of which are perceived by us in what
 Science is pleased to call the "modes of motion" --
 the imponderable forces and what not -- are the still higher noumenoi
 of still higher Hierarchies.
 </p><p>
 It was the "Golden Age" in those days of old, the age
 when the "gods walked the earth, and mixed freely with the
 mortals." Since then, the gods departed (<em>i.e.</em>, became
 invisible), and later generations ended by worshipping their kingdoms
 -- the Elements.
 </p><p>
 It was the Atlanteans, the first progeny of <em>semi-divine </em>man
 after his separation into sexes -- hence the first-begotten and
 humanly-born mortals -- who became the first "Sacrificers"
 to the <em>god of matter. </em>They stand in the far-away dim
 past, in ages more than prehistoric, as the prototype on which
 the great symbol of Cain was built,** as the first anthropomorphists
 who worshipped form and matter. That worship degenerated very
 soon into <em>self-worship, </em>thence led to phallicism, or
 that which reigns supreme to this day in the symbolisms of every
 exoteric religion of ritual, dogma, and form. Adam and Eve <em>became
 matter, </em>or furnished the soil, Cain and Abel -- the latter
 the life-bearing soil, the former "the tiller of that ground
 or field."
 </p><p>
 Thus the first Atlantean races, born on the Lemurian Continent,
 separated from their earliest tribes into the righteous and the
 unrighteous; into those who worshipped the one unseen Spirit of
 Nature, the ray of which man feels within himself -- or the Pantheists,
 and those who offered fanatical worship to the Spirits of the
 Earth, the dark Cosmic, anthropomorphic Powers, with whom they
 made alliance. These were the earliest <em>Gibborim, </em>"the
 mighty men of renown in those
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The "Gods of the Elements" are by no means the Elementals.
 The latter are at best used by them as vehicles and materials
 in which to clothe themselves. . . . .
 </p><p>
 ** Cain was the <em>sacrificer, </em>as shown at first in chap.
 iv. of <em>Genesis, </em>of "the fruit of the ground,"
 of which he was <em>first tiller</em>, while Abel "brought
 of the firstlings of his flock" to the Lord. Cain is the
 symbol of the first male, Abel of the first female humanity, Adam
 and Eve being the types of the third race. (See "<em>The
 Mystery of Cain and</em> <em>Abel.</em>") The "murdering"
 is blood-shedding, but not taking life.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 274 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 days" (<em>Gen. </em>vi.); who become with the Fifth Race
 the <em>Kabirim:</em> Kabiri with the Egyptians and the Phoenicians,
 Titans with the Greeks, and Rakshasas and Daityas with the Indian
 races.
 </p><p>
 Such was the secret and mysterious origin of all the subsequent
 and modern religions, especially of the worship of the later Hebrews
 for their tribal god. At the same time this sexual religion was
 closely allied to, based upon and blended, so to say, with astronomical
 phenomena. The Lemurians gravitated toward the North Pole, or
 the Heaven of their Progenitors (the Hyperborean Continent); the
 Atlanteans, toward the Southern Pole, the<em> pit</em>, cosmically
 and terrestrially -- whence breathe the hot passions blown into
 hurricanes by the cosmic Elementals, whose abode it is. The two
 poles were denominated, by the ancients, Dragons and Serpents
 -- hence good and bad Dragons and Serpents, and also the names
 given to the "Sons of God" (Sons of Spirit and Matter):
 the good and bad Magicians. This is the origin of this dual and
 triple nature in man. The legend of the "Fallen Angels"
 in its esoteric signification, contains the key to the manifold
 contradictions of human character; it points to the secret of
 man's self-consciousness; it is the angle-iron on which hinges
 his entire life-cycle; -- the history of his evolution and growth.
 </p><p>
 On a firm grasp of this doctrine depends the correct understanding
 of esoteric anthropogenesis. It gives a clue to the vexed question
 of the Origin of Evil; and shows how man himself is the separator
 of the <strong>O</strong>NE into various contrasted aspects.
 </p><p>
 The reader, therefore, will not be surprised if so considerable
 space is devoted in each case to an attempt to elucidate this
 difficult and obscure subject. A good deal must necessarily be
 said on its symbological aspect; because, by so doing, hints are
 given to the thoughtful student for his own investigations, and
 more light can thus be suggested than it is possible to convey
 in the technical phrases of a more formal, philosophical exposition.
 The "Fallen Angels," so-called, are <em>Humanity</em>
 <em>itself. </em>The Demon of Pride, Lust, Rebellion, and Hatred,
 has never had <em>any being before </em>the appearance of physical
 conscious man. It is man who has begotten, nurtured, and allowed
 the fiend to develop in his heart; he, again, who has contaminated
 the indwelling god in himself, by linking the pure spirit with
 the impure demon of matter. And, if the Kabalistic saying, "<em>Demon
 est Deus inversus</em>"<em> </em>finds its metaphysical and
 theoretical corroboration in dual manifested nature, its practical
 application is found in Mankind alone.
 </p><p>
 Thus it has now become self-evident that postulating as we do
 (<em>a</em>) the appearance of man before that of other mammalia,
 and even before the ages of the huge reptiles; (<em>b</em>) periodical
 deluges and glacial periods owing to the karmic disturbance of
 the axis; and chiefly (<em>c</em>) the birth of man</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 275 NO DEVILS OUTSIDE HUMANITY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 from a Superior Being, or what materialism would call a <em>supernatural</em>
 Being, though it is only super-<em>human</em> -- it is evident
 that our teachings have very few chances of an impartial hearing.
 Add to it the claim that a portion of the Mankind in the Third
 Race -- all those Monads of men who had reached the highest point
 of Merit and <em>Karma </em>in the preceding Manvantara -- owed
 their psychic and <em>rational </em>natures to divine Beings <em>hypostasizing
 </em>into their fifth principles, and the <em>Secret</em> <em>Doctrine
 </em>must lose caste in the eyes of not only Materialism but even
 of dogmatic Christianity. For, no sooner will the latter have
 learned that those angels are identical with their "Fallen"
 Spirits, than the esoteric tenet will be proclaimed most terribly
 heretical and pernicious.* The <em>divine </em>man dwelt in the
 animal, and, therefore, when the physiological separation took
 place in the natural course of evolution -- when also "all
 the animal creation was <em>untied,</em>"<em> </em>and males
 were attracted to <em>females -- that race fell: </em>not because
 they had eaten of the fruit of Knowledge and knew good from evil,
 but because they knew no better. Propelled by the sexless creative
 instinct, the early sub-races had evolved an intermediate race
 in which, as hinted in the Stanzas, the higher Dhyan-Chohans had
 incarnated.** "When we have ascertained the extent of the
 Universe and learnt to know all that there is in it, we will multiply
 our race," answer the <em>Sons of Will and Yoga </em>to their
 brethren of the same race, who invite them to do as they do. This
 means that the great Adepts and Initiated ascetics will "multiply,"
 <em>i.e</em>., once more produce <em>Mind-born </em>immaculate
 Sons -- in the Seventh Root-Race.
 </p><p>
 It is so stated in the Puranas; in <em>Adi Parvan </em>(<em>p.
 </em>115)<em> </em>and <em>Brahma</em> <em>Purana, </em>etc. In
 one portion of the <em>Pushkara Mahatmya, </em>moreover, the separation
 of the sexes is allegorized by Daksha, who, seeing that his will-born
 progeny (the "Sons of passive Yoga"), will not create
 men, "<em>converts half himself into a female </em>by whom
 he begets daughters," the future females of the Third Race
 which begat the giants of Atlantis,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is, perhaps, with an eye to this <em>degradation </em>of
 the highest and purest Spirits, who broke through the intermediate
 planes of lower consciousness (the "Seven circles of fire"
 of Pymander), that St. James is made to say that "this Wisdom
 (<em>psuche </em>in the original) descended not from above, but
 is earthly, sensual, <em>devilish</em>"; and <em>Psuche</em>
 is <em>Manas, </em>the "human soul," the Spiritual Wisdom
 or Soul being <em>Buddhi. </em>Yet Buddhi <em>per se, </em>being
 so near the Absolute, is only <em>latent</em> consciousness.
 </p><p>
 ** This is the "undying race" as it is called in Esotericism,
 and exoterically the fruitless generation of the first progeny
 of Daksha, who curses Narada, the divine Rishi, alleged to have
 dissuaded the Haryaswas and the Sabalaswas, the sons of Daksha,
 from procreating their species, by saying "Be born in the
 womb; there shall not be a resting place for thee in all these
 regions"; after this Narada, the representative of that race
 of <em>fruitless </em>ascetics, is said, as soon as he dies in
 one body, to be reborn in another.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 276 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Fourth Race, so called. In the Vishnu Purana it is simply
 said that Daksha, the father of mankind, established sexual intercourse
 as the means of peopling the world.
 </p><p>
 Happily for the human race the "Elect Race" had already
 become the vehicle of incarnation of the (intellectually and spiritually)
 highest Dhyanis before Humanity had become quite material. When
 the last sub-races -- save some lowest -- of the Third Race had
 perished with the great Lemurian Continent, "the seeds of
 <em>the Trinity of Wisdom</em>"<em> had</em> already acquired
 the secret of immortality on Earth, that gift which allows the
 same great personality to step <em>ad libitum </em>from one worn-out
 body into another.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>The first war that earth knew, the first
 human gore shed, was the result of man's eyes and senses being
 opened; which made him see that the daughters of his Brethren
 were fairer than his own, and their wives also. There were rapes
 committed before that of the Sabines, and Menelauses robbed of
 their Helens before the Fifth Race was born. Titans or giants
 were the stronger; their adversaries, the wiser. This took place
 during the Fourth Race -- that of the giants.
 </p><p>
 For "there <em>were </em>giants" in the days of old,
 indeed* and the evolutionary series of the animal world is a warrant
 that the same thing took place within the human races. Lower still
 in the order of creation we find witnesses for the same in the
 flora going <em>pari passu </em>with the fauna in respect of size.
 The pretty ferns we collect and dry among the leaves of our favourite
 volumes are the descendants of the gigantic ferns which grew during
 the carboniferous period.
 </p><p>
 Scriptures, and fragments of philosophical and scientific works
 -- in short, almost every record that has come down to us from
 antiquity -- contain references to giants. No one can fail to
 recognize the Atlanteans of the Secret Doctrine in the Rakshasas
 of Lanka -- the opponents conquered by Rama. Are these accounts
 no better than the production of empty fancy? Let us give the
 subject a few moments of attention.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The traditions of every country and nation point to this fact.
 Donnelly quotes from Father Duran's <em>Historia Antigua de la
 Nueva Espana </em>of 1885, in which a native of Cholula, a centenarian,
 accounts for the building of the great pyramid of Cholula, by
 saying as follows: "In the beginning, before the light of
 the Sun had been created, this land (Cholula) was in obscurity
 and darkness . . . . but immediately <em>after the light of</em>
 <em>the Sun arose in the East, </em>there appeared gigantic men
 . . . . who built the said pyramid, its builders being scattered
 after that to all parts of the Earth."
 </p><p>
 "A great deal of the Central American history is taken up
 with the doings of an ancient race of giants called Quinanes,"
 says the author of "Atlantis" (p. 204.)</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-16.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>