<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 475 NATURE, A STONE-COLD MOTHER.</h6>
 
 <h3>§ XVIII.</h3>
 
 <h4>ON THE MYTH OF THE "FALLEN ANGEL,"<br>
 IN ITS VARIOUS ASPECTS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong>A</strong>.
 </p><p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>E</strong>VIL <strong>S</strong>PIRIT:
 <strong>W</strong>HO, AND <strong>W</strong>HAT?
 </p><p>
 <strong>O</strong>UR present quarrel is exclusively with theology.
 The Church enforces belief in a personal god and a personal devil,
 while Occultism shows the fallacy of such a belief. And though
 for the Pantheists and Occultists, as much as for the Pessimists,
 Nature is no better than "a comely mother, but stone cold"
 -- this is true only so far as regards <em>external </em>physical
 nature. They both agree that, to the superficial observer, she
 is no better than an immense slaughter-house wherein butchers
 become victims, and victims executioners in their turn. It is
 quite natural that the pessimistically inclined profane, once
 convinced of Nature's numerous shortcomings and failures, and
 especially of her autophagous propensities, should imagine this
 to be the best evidence that there is no deity <em>in abscondito
 </em>within Nature, nor anything divine in her. Nor is it less
 natural that the materialist and the physicist should imagine
 that everything is due to blind force and chance, and to the survival
 of the <em>strongest, </em>even more often than of the <em>fittest.
 </em>But the Occultists, who regard physical nature as a bundle
 of most varied illusions on the plane of deceptive perceptions;
 who recognise in every pain and suffering but the necessary pangs
 of incessant procreation: a series of stages toward an ever-growing
 perfectibility, which is visible in the silent influence of never-erring
 Karma, or <em>abstract </em>nature -- the Occultists, we say,
 view the great Mother otherwise. Woe to those who live without
 suffering. Stagnation and death is the future of all that vegetates
 without a change. And how can there be any change for the better
 without proportionate suffering during the preceding stage? Is
 it not those only who have learnt the deceptive value of earthly
 hopes and the illusive allurements of external nature who are
 destined to solve the great problems of life, pain, and death?
 </p><p>
 If our modern philosophers -- preceded by the medieval scholars
 -- have helped themselves to more than one fundamental idea of
 antiquity, theologians have built their God and his Archangels,
 their Satan and his Angels, along with the Logos and his staff,
 entirely out of the <em>dramatis personae </em>of the old heathen
 Pantheons. They would have been</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 476 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
 </p><p>
 welcome to these, had they not cunningly distorted the original
 characters, perverted the philosophical meaning, and taking advantage
 of the ignorance of Christendom -- the result of long ages of
 mental sleep, during which humanity was permitted to think only
 by proxy -- tossed every symbol into the most inextricable confusion.
 One of their most sinful achievements in this direction, was the
 transformation of the divine <em>alter ego </em>into the grotesque
 Satan of their theology.
 </p><p>
 As the whole philosophy of the problem of evil hangs upon the
 correct comprehension of the constitution of the <em>inner</em>
 being of nature and man, of the divine within the animal, and
 hence also the correctness of the whole system as given in these
 pages, with regard to the crown piece of evolution -- <strong>M</strong>AN
 -- we cannot take sufficient precautions against theological subterfuges.
 When the good St. Augustine and the fiery Tertullian called the
 Devil "the monkey of God," this could be attributed
 to the ignorance of the age they lived in. It is more difficult
 to excuse our modern writers on the same ground. The translation
 of Mazdean literature has afforded to the Roman Catholic writers
 the pretext for proving their point in the same direction once
 more. They have taken advantage of the dual nature of Ahura Mazda
 in the Zend Avesta and the Vendidad, and of his Amshaspends, to
 emphasize still further their wild theories. <em>Satan is the
 plagiarist and the copyist</em> <em>by anticipation </em>of the
 religion which came ages later. This was one of the master strokes
 of the Latin Church, its best trump-card after the appearance
 of Spiritualism in Europe. Though only a <em>succes d'estime,</em>
 in general, even among those who are not interested in either
 Theosophy or Spiritualism, yet the weapon is often used by the
 Christian (Roman Catholic) Kabalists against the Eastern Occultists.
 </p><p>
 Now even the Materialists are quite harmless, and may be regarded
 as the friends of Theosophy, when compared to some fanatical "Christian"
 (as they call themselves, "Sectarian" as we call them)
 Kabalists, on the Continent. These read the <em>Zohar, </em>not
 to find in it ancient Wisdom, but to discover in its verses, by
 mangling the texts and meaning, Christian dogmas, where none could
 ever have been meant; and, having fished them out with the collective
 help of jesuitical casuistry and learning, the supposed "Kabalists"
 proceed to write books and to mislead less far-sighted students
 of the Kabala.*
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Such a <em>pseudo</em>-Kabalist was the Marquis de Mirville
 in France, who, having studied the <em>Zohar </em>and other old
 remnants of Jewish Wisdom under the "Chevalier" Drach,
 an ancient Rabbi Kabalist converted to the Romish Church -- wrote
 with his help half a dozen volumes full of slander and calumnies
 against every prominent Spiritualist and Kabalist. From 1848 up
 to 1860 he persecuted unrelentingly the old Count d'Ourches, one
 of the earliest Eastern Occultists in France, a man the scope
 of whose occult knowledge will never be appreciated correctly
 by his survivors, because he screened his real beliefs and knowledge
 under the mask of Spiritism.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 477 THE GENESIS OF THE DEVIL.
 </p><p>
 May we not then be permitted to drag the deep rivers of the Past,
 and thus bring to the surface the root idea that led to the transformation
 of the Wisdom-God, who had first been regarded as the creator
 of everything that exists, into an Angel of Evil -- a ridiculous
 horned biped, half goat and half monkey, with hoofs and a tail?
 We need not go out of the way to compare the pagan demons of either
 Egypt, India, or Chaldea with the devil of Christianity, for no
 such comparison is possible. But we may stop to glance at the
 biography of the Christian Devil, a piratical reprint from the
 Chaldeo-Judaean mythology: --
 </p><p>
 The primitive origin of this personification rests upon the Akkadian
 conception of the cosmic powers -- the Heavens and the Earth --
 in eternal feud and struggle with Chaos. Their Silik-Muludag,
 "the God amongst all the Gods," the "merciful guardian
 of men on Earth," was the Son of Hea (or Ea) the great God
 of Wisdom, called by the Babylonians Nebu. With both peoples --
 as in the case of the Hindu gods -- their deities were both beneficent
 and maleficent. As Evil and punishment are the agents of Karma,
 in an absolutely just retributive sense, so Evil was the servant
 of the good (Hibbert Lect. 1887, pp. 101-115). The reading of
 the Chaldeo-Assyrian tiles has now demonstrated it beyond a shadow
 of doubt. We find the same idea in the Zohar. Satan was a Son,
 and an Angel of God. With all the Semitic nations, the Spirit
 of the Earth was as much the Creator in his own realm as the Spirit
 of the Heavens. They were twin brothers and interchangeable in
 their functions, when not two in one. Nothing of that which we
 find in Genesis is absent from the Chaldeo-Assyrian religious
 beliefs, even in the little that has hitherto been deciphered.
 The great "Face of the Deep" of Genesis is traced in
 the <em>Tohu-bohu,</em> "Deep," "Primeval Space,"
 or Chaos of the Babylonians. Wisdom (the Great Unseen God) --
 called in <em>Genesis </em>chap. i. the "Spirit of God"
 -- lived, for the older Babylonians as for the Akkadians, in the
 <em>Sea of Space. </em>Toward the days described by Berosus, this
 sea became the visible waters <em>on the face of the Earth</em>
 -- the<em> </em>crystalline abode of the great mother, the mother
 of Ea and all the gods, which became, still later, the great Dragon
 Tiamat, the Sea Serpent. Its last stage of development was the
 great struggle of Bel with the Dragon -- the Devil!
 </p><p>
 Whence the Christian idea that God cursed the Devil? The God of
 the Jews, whomsoever he was, forbids cursing Satan. Philo Judaeus
 and Josephus both state that the Law (the Pentateuch and the Talmud)
 undeviatingly forbid one to curse the adversary, as also the gods
 of the gentiles. "Thou shalt not revile the gods," quoth
 the god of Moses (Exodus xxii. 28), for it is God who "hath
 divided (them) unto all nations" (Deut. iv. 19); and those
 who speak evil of</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 478 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
 </p><p>
 "Dignities" (gods) are called "<em>filthy</em>
 dreamers" by Jude (8). For even Michael the Archangel durst
 not bring against him (the devil) a railing accusation, but said:
 "The Lord rebuke thee" (<em>ibid </em>9). Finally the
 same is repeated in the Talmud.* "Satan appeared one day
 to a man who used to curse him daily, and said to him: 'Why dost
 thou this?' Consider that <em>God himself </em>would not curse
 me, but merely said: 'The Lord rebuke thee, Satan.' "**
 </p><p>
 This bit of Talmudic information shows plainly two things: (<em>a</em>)
 that St. Michael is called "God" in the Talmud, and
 somebody else "the Lord"; and (<em>b</em>) that Satan
 is <em>a God, </em>of whom even the "Lord" is in fear.
 All we read in the Zohar and other Kabalistic works on Satan shows
 plainly that this "personage" is simply the personification
 of the abstract evil, which is the weapon of Karmic law and <strong>K</strong>ARMA.
 It is our human nature and man himself, as it is said that "Satan
 is always near and inextricably interwoven with man." It
 is only a question of that Power being latent or active in us.
 </p><p>
 It is a well-known fact -- to learned Symbologists at all events
 -- that in every great religion of antiquity, it is the Logos
 Demiurge (the second logos), or the first emanation from the mind
 (Mahat), who is made to strike, so<em> </em>to say, the key-note
 of that which may be called the correlation of individuality and
 personality in the subsequent scheme of evolution. The Logos it
 is, who is shown in the mystic symbolism of cosmogony, theogony,
 and anthropogony, playing two parts in the drama of Creation and
 Being, <em>i.e</em>., that of the purely human personality and
 the divine impersonality of the so-called Avatars, or divine incarnations,
 and of the universal Spirit, called Christos by the Gnostics,
 and the Farvarshi (or <em>Ferouer) </em>of Ahura Mazda in the
 Mazdean philosophy. On the lower rungs of theogony the celestial
 Beings of lower Hierarchies had each a <em>Farvarshi, </em>or
 a celestial "Double." It is the same, only a still more
 mystic, reassertion of the Kabalistic axiom, <em>"Deus est
 Demon inversus"; </em>the word "demon," however,
 as in the case of Socrates, and in the spirit of the meaning given
 to it by the whole of antiquity, standing for the guardian Spirit,
 an "Angel," not a devil of Satanic descent, as theology
 will have it. The Roman Catholic Church shows its usual logic
 and consistency by accepting, as the <em>ferouer </em>of Christ,
 St. Michael, who was "his Angel Guardian," as <em>proved
 </em>by St. Thomas,*** while he calls the prototypes of Michael
 and his synonyms, such as Mercury, for example, devils
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>* Vide Isis Unveiled, </em>Vol. <strong>II</strong>., 487,
 <em>et seq.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** Treat. <em>Kiddusheem, </em>81. But see the Qabbala by Mr.
 I. Myer, pp. 92, 94, and the Zohar, quoted in his Volume.
 </p><p>
 *** In the work of Marangone "Delle grandezze del Archangelo
 Sancto Mikaele," the author exclaims: "O Star, the greatest
 of those that follow the Sun who is Christ! . . . [[continued
 on following page]]</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 479 GOD AND DEVIL, BOTH METATRONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 The Church accepts positively the tenet that Christ has his <em>Ferouer</em>
 as any other god or mortal has. Writes de Mirville: "Here
 we have the two heroes of the Old Testament, the <em>Verbum</em>
 (?),<em> </em>or the <em>second</em> Jehovah, and his <em>face
 </em>('Presence,' as the Protestants translate) forming both but
 one, and yet being two, a mystery which seemed to us unsolvable
 before we had studied the doctrine of the Mazdean <em>ferouers,</em>
 and learnt that the <em>ferouer </em>was the spiritual potency,
 at once <em>image,</em> <em>face, </em>and the <em>guardian </em>of
 the Soul which finally assimilates the <em>ferouer."</em><i>
 </i>(<em>Memoires a l'Academie, </em>Vol. v., p. 516.) This is
 <em>almost </em>correct.
 </p><p>
 Among other absurdities, the Kabalists maintain that the word
 <em>metatron </em>being divided into [[<em>meta</em>, <em>thronon</em>]],
 means <em>near the throne. </em>It means quite the reverse, as
 meta means "beyond" and not "near." This is
 of great importance in our argument. St. Michael, then, the <em>quis
 ut</em> <em>Deus, </em>is the translator, so to speak, of the
 invisible world into the visible and the objective.
 </p><p>
 They maintain, furthermore, along with the Roman Catholic Church,
 that in the Biblical and Christian theology there does not exist
 a "higher celestial personality, after the Trinity, than
 that of the Archangel or the Seraphim, <em>Michael</em>."
 According to them, the conqueror of the Dragon is "the archisatrap
 of the sacred militia, the guardian of the planets, the King of
 the Stars, the slayer of Satan and the most powerful Rector."
 In the mystic astronomy of these gentlemen, he is "the conqueror
 of Ahriman, who having upset the sidereal throne of the usurper,
 bathes in his stead in the solar fires"; and, defender of
 the Christ-Sun, he approaches so near his Master, "that he
 seems to become one with him . . . . Owing to this fusion with
 the <strong>W</strong>ORD (<em>Verbum</em>)<em> </em>the Protestants,
 and among them Calvin, ended by losing sight entirely of the duality,
 and saw no Michael but only his Master," writes the Abbe
 Caron. The Roman Catholics, and especially their Kabalists, know
 better; and it is they who explain to the world this duality,
 which affords to them the means of glorifying the chosen ones
 of the Church, and of rejecting and anathematizing all those Gods
 who may be in the way of their dogmas.
 </p><p>
 Thus the same titles and the same names are given in turn to God
 and the Archangel. Both are called <em>Metatron, </em>"both
 have the name of Jehovah applied to them when they speak <em>one
 in the other" (sic) </em>as, according to the <em>Zohar,
 </em>the term signifies equally "the Master and the Ambassador."
 Both are the <em>Angel of the Face, </em>because, as we are informed,
 if, on the one hand, the "Word" is called "the
 face (or the Presence) and the image of the substance of God,"
 on the other, "when
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] O living image of Divinity!
 O great thaumaturgist of the old Testament! O invisible Vicar
 of Christ within his Church! . . ." etc., etc. The work is
 in great honour in the Latin Church.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 480 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 speaking of the <em>Saviour </em>to the Israelites, Isaiah (?)
 tells them that "the angel of his presence saved them in
 their affliction" -- "so he was their Saviour."*
 Elsewhere he (Michael) is called very plainly "the Prince
 of the <em>Faces </em>of the Lord, the <em>glory </em>of the Lord."
 Both (Jehovah and Michael) are "the <em>guides </em>of Israel**
 . . . chiefs of the <em>armies </em>of the Lord, <em>Supreme Judges
 </em>of the souls and even Seraphs."***
 </p><p>
 The whole of the above is given on the authority of various works
 by Roman Catholics, and must, therefore, be orthodox. Some expressions
 are translated to show what subtle theologians and casuists mean
 by the term Ferouer,**** a word borrowed by some French writers
 from the <em>Zend Avesta, </em>as said, and utilized in Roman
 Catholicism for a purpose Zoroaster was very far from anticipating.
 In Fargard <strong>XIX</strong>. of the <em>Vendidad </em>it is
 said (verse 14), "Invoke, O Zarathustra! my Farvarshi, who
 am Ahura Mazda, the greatest, the best, the fairest of all beings,
 the most solid, the most intelligent, . . . . and whose soul is
 the Holy Word" (Mathra Spenta). The French Orientalists translate
 <em>Farvarshi</em> by<em> "Ferouer."</em> 
 </p><p>
 Now what is a Ferouer, or Farvarshi? In some Mazdean works (<i>e.g</i>.,
 Ormazd Ahriman, §§ 112, 113), it is plainly implied
 that Farvarshi is the <i>inner</i>, immortal man (or that <em>Ego
 </em>which reincarnates); that it existed before its physical
 body and survives all such it happens to be clothed in. "Not
 only man was endowed with the Farvarshi, <em>but gods</em> <em>too,
 </em>and the sky, fire, waters, and plants." (Introduction
 to the <em>Vendidad, </em>by J. Darmesteter). This shows as plainly
 as can be shown that the<em> ferouer </em>is the "spiritual
 counterpart" of whether god, animal, plant, or even element,
 <i>i.e</i>., the refined and the <em>purer</em> part of the grosser
 creation, the soul of the body, whatever the body may happen to
 be. Therefore does Ahura Mazda recommend Zarathustra to invoke
 his <em>Farvarshi </em>and not himself (Ahura-Mazda); that is
 to say, the impersonal and <em>true </em>Essence of Deity, <em>one
 with Zoroaster's own Atman </em>(or Christos), not the <em>false
 </em>and personal appearance. This is quite clear.
 </p><p>
 Now it is on this divine and ethereal prototype that the Roman
 Catholics seized so as to build up the supposed difference between
 their god and angels, and the deity and its aspects, or the gods
 of the old religions. Thus, while calling Mercury, Venus, Jupiter
 (whether as gods or planets) <strong>D</strong>EVILS, they yet
 make of the same Mercury the <em>ferouer</em> of their Christ.
 This fact is undeniable. Vossius (<em>De Idol., </em><strong>II</strong>.,
 373)
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Isaiah, lxiii. 8-9.
 </p><p>
 ** Metator and [[<em>hegemon</em>]]<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 *** "La Face et le Representant du Verbe," p. 18, de
 Mirville.
 </p><p>
 **** That which is called in the <em>Vendidad</em> "Farvarshi,"
 the immortal part of an individual, that which outlives <em>man</em>
 -- the Higher Ego, say the Occultists, or the divine Double.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 481 FRAUDULENT TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 proves that Michael is the Mercury of the <em>pagans, </em>and
 Maury and other French writers corroborate him, and add that "according
 to great theologians <em>Mercury and the Sun are one," </em>(?)
 and no wonder, they think, since "Mercury being so near the
 Wisdom of the <em>Verbum </em>(the Sun), must be absorbed by and
 confounded with him."
 </p><p>
 This "pagan" view was accepted from the first century
 of our era, as shown in the ORIGINAL <em>Acts of the Apostles
 </em>(the English translation being worthless). So much is Michael
 the Mercury of the Greeks and other nations, that when the inhabitants
 of Lystra mistook Paul and Barnabas for Mercury and Jupiter --
 "the gods have come down to us in the likeness of men,"
 -- verse 12 (xiv.) adds: "And they called Barnabas Zeus,
 and Paul, Hermes (or Mercury), because he was the <em>leader of
 the </em>WORD<em> (Verbum),</em>"<em> </em>and not "the
 chief speaker," as erroneously translated in the authorised,
 and repeated even in the revised, English Bible. Michael is the
 angel in the Vision, the Son of God, "who was like unto a
 Son of Man." It is the Hermes-Christos of the Gnostics, the
 Anubis-Syrius of the Egyptians, the Counsellor of Osiris in <em>Amenti,
 </em>the Michael <em>leontoid </em>[[<em>ophiomorphos</em>]] of
 the Ophites, who wears on certain Gnostic jewels a lion <em>head,
 </em>like his father Ildabaoth. (See King's<em> Gnostics</em>.)
 </p><p>
 Now to all this the Roman Catholic Church consents tacitly, many
 of her writers avowing it publicly. And, unable to deny the flagrant
 "borrowing" of their Church, who "spoilt"
 the symbols of her seniors, as the Jews had "spoilt"
 the Egyptians of their jewels of silver and gold, they explain
 the fact quite coolly and as seriously. Thus the writers who were
 hitherto <em>timid</em> enough to see, in this repetition by Christian
 dogmas of old Pagan ideas, "a <em>legendary plagiarism </em>perpetrated
 by man," are gravely assured that, far from such a simple
 solution of the almost perfect resemblance, it has to be attributed
 to quite another cause: "to a <em>prehistorical </em>plagiarism,
 of a <em>superhuman </em>origin."
 </p><p>
 If the reader would know how, he must kindly turn to the same
 fifth volume of de Mirville's work. Please note that this author
 was the <em>official and recognised defender </em>of the Roman
 Church, and was helped by the learning of all the Jesuits. On
 page 518 we read: --
 </p><p>
 "We have pointed out several demi-gods, and also very historical
 heroes of the pagans, who were predestined from the moment of
 their birth, <em>to ape while dishonouring it, </em>the nativity
 of the hero, <em>who was quite</em> <em>God, </em>before whom
 the whole earth had to bow; we traced them being born as <em>he
 </em>was, from an immaculate mother; we saw them strangling serpents
 in their cradles, fighting against demons, performing miracles,
 dying as martyrs, descending to the nether world and rising again
 from the dead. And we have bitterly deplored that timid and shy
 Christians should feel compelled to explain all such identities
 on the ground of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 482 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 coincidence of myth and symbol. They forgot apparently these words
 of the Saviour: '<strong>A</strong>LL THAT CAME BEFORE ME ARE
 THIEVES AND ROBBERS,' a word which explains all without any absurd
 negation and which I commented in these words 'The Evangel is
 a sublime drama, <em>parodied</em> <em>and played before its appointed
 time by ruffians.</em>' "
 </p><p>
 The "ruffians" (<em>les droles</em>)<em>, </em>are of
 course <em>demons </em>whose manager is Satan. Now this is the
 easiest and the most sublime and simple way of getting out of
 the difficulty! The Rev. Dr. Lundy, a Protestant de Mirville,
 followed the happy suggestion in his "Monumental Christianity,"
 and so did Dr. Sepp of Munich in his works written to prove the
 divinity of Jesus and the Satanic origin of all other Saviours.
 So much greater the pity that a systematic and collective plagiarism,
 which went on for several centuries on the most gigantic scale,
 should be explained by another plagiarism, this time in the fourth
 Gospel. For the sentence quoted from it, "All that ever came
 before me, etc.," is a <em>verbatim </em>repetition of words
 written in the "Book of Enoch" lxxxix. In the <em>Introduction
 </em>to Archbishop Lawrence's translation of it from an Ethiopic
 <strong>MS</strong>. in the Bodleian Library, the editor, author
 of the "Evolution of Christianity," remarks: --
 </p><p>
 "In revising the proof-sheets of the Book of Enoch . . .
 . . the parable of the sheep, rescued by the good Shepherd from
 hireling guardians and ferocious wolves, <em>is obviously borrowed
 by the fourth</em> <em>Evangelist </em>from Enoch, lxxxix., in
 which the author depicts the shepherds as killing . . . the sheep
 before the advent of their Lord, and thus discloses the true meaning
 of that hitherto mysterious passage in the Johannine parable --
 'All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers' -- language
 in which we now detect an obvious reference to the allegorical
 shepherds of Enoch."
 </p><p>
 It is too late in the day to claim that it is Enoch who borrowed
 from the New Testament, instead of <em>vice versa. </em>Jude (14-15)
 quotes <i>verbatim</i> from Enoch a long passage about the coming
 of the Lord with his 10,000 saints, and naming specifically the
 prophet, <em>acknowledges</em> the source. This "parallelism
 between prophet and apostle, have placed beyond controversy that,
 <em>in the eyes of the author of an Epistle accepted</em> <em>as
 divine revelation, </em>the Book of Enoch <em>was the inspired
 production of an</em> <em>antediluvian patriarch . </em>. . "
 and further " . . . the cumulative coincidence of language
 and ideas in Enoch and the authors of <strong>N.T</strong>. Scripture,
 . . . clearly indicates that the work of the Semitic Milton was
 the inexhaustible source from which Evangelists and Apostles,
 or the men who wrote in their names, borrowed their conceptions
 of the resurrection, judgment, immortality, perdition, and of
 the universal reign of righteousness under the eternal dominion
 of the Son of Man. This <em>Evangelical</em> <em>plagiarism </em>culminates
 in the Revelation of John, which adapts the visions</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 483 VEDAS, ONCE UNIVERSAL.
 </p><p>
 of Enoch to Christianity, with modifications in which we miss
 the sublime simplicity of the great Master of apocalyptic <em>prediction</em><i>,</i>
 who prophesied in the name of the antediluvian Patriarch."
 (<strong>I</strong>NT. xxxv.)
 </p><p>
 "Antediluvian," truly; but if the phraseology of the
 text dates hardly a few centuries or even millenniums before the
 historical era, then it is no more the original <em>prediction
 </em>of the events to come, but, in its turn, a copy of some scripture
 of a prehistoric religion. . . . . "In the Krita age, Vishnu,
 in the form of Kapila and other (inspired sages) . . . imparts
 to the world true wisdom as Enoch did. In the Treta age he restrains
 the wicked, in the form of a universal monarch (the Chakravartin
 or the 'Everlasting King' of Enoch*) and protects the three worlds
 (or races). In the Dwapara age, in the person of Veda-Vyasa, he
 divides the one Veda into four, and distributes it into hundreds
 (<em>Sata</em>) of branches." Truly so; the <em>Veda </em>of
 the earliest Aryans, before it was written, went forth into every
 nation of the Atlanto-Lemurians, and sowed the first seeds of
 all the now existing old religions. The off-shoots of the never
 dying tree of wisdom have scattered their dead leaves even on
 Judaeo-Christianity. And at the end of the Kali, our present age,
 Vishnu, or the "Everlasting King" will appear as Kalki,
 and re-establish righteousness upon earth. The minds of those
 who live at that time shall be awakened, and become as pellucid
 as crystal. "The men who are thus changed by virtue of that
 peculiar time (the sixth race) <em>shall be as the seeds </em>of
 other human beings, and shall give birth to a race who shall follow
 the laws of the Krita age of purity"; <i>i.e</i>., it shall
 be the seventh race, the race of "Buddhas," the "Sons
 of God," born of <em>immaculate </em>parents.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong>B</strong>.
 </p><p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>G</strong>ODS OF <strong>L</strong>IGHT
 PROCEED FROM THE <strong>G</strong>ODS OF <strong>D</strong>ARKNESS.
 </p><p>
 Thus it is pretty well established that Christ, the Logos, or
 the God in Space and the Saviour on Earth, is but one of the echoes
 of the same antediluvian and sorely misunderstood Wisdom. The
 history begins by the descent on Earth of the "Gods"
 who incarnate in mankind, and this is the <strong>F</strong>ALL.
 Whether Brahma hurled down on Earth in the allegory by Bhagavant,
 or Jupiter by Kronos, all are the symbols of the human races.
 Once landed on, and having touched this planet of dense matter,
 no snow-white wings of the highest angel can remain immaculate,
 or the <em>Avatar </em>(or incarnation) be perfect, as every such
 Avatar is
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Saith Uriel (chap. xxvi. v. 3), in the "Book of Enoch"
 "all those who have received mercy shall for ever bless God
 <em>the everlasting King,</em>"<em> </em>who will reign over
 them.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 484 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
 </p><p>
 the fall of a God into generation. Nowhere is the metaphysical
 truth more clear, when explained esoterically, or more hidden
 from the average comprehension of those who instead of appreciating
 the sublimity of the idea can only degrade, than in the <em>Upanishads,
 </em>the esoteric glossaries of the Vedas. The Rig-Veda, as Guignault
 characterized it, "is the most sublime conception of the
 great highways of Humanity." The Vedas are, and will remain
 for ever, in the esotericism of the Vedanta and the Upanishads,
 "the mirror of the eternal Wisdom."
 </p><p>
 For over sixteen centuries the new masks, forced on the faces
 of the old gods, have screened them from public curiosity, but
 they have finally proved a misfit. Yet the metaphorical <strong>F</strong>ALL,
 and as metaphorical atonement and crucifixion, led Western Humanity
 through roads knee-deep in blood. Worse than all, they led it
 to believe in the dogma of the evil spirit distinct from the spirit
 of all good, whereas the former lives in all matter and pre-eminently
 in man. Finally it created the God-slandering dogma of Hell and
 eternal perdition; it spread a thick film between the higher intuitions
 of man and divine verities; and, most pernicious result of all,
 it made people remain ignorant of the fact that there were no
 fiends, no dark demons in the Universe before man's own appearance
 on this, and probably on other earths. Henceforth the people were
 led to accept, as the problematical consolation for this world's
 sorrows, the thought of original sin.
 </p><p>
 The philosophy of that law in Nature, which implants in man as
 well as in every beast a passionate, inherent, and instinctive
 desire for freedom and self-guidance, pertains to psychology and
 cannot be touched on now. To show the feeling in higher Intelligences,
 to analyse and give a natural reason for it, would necessitate,
 moreover, an endless philosophical explanation for which there
 is no room here. Perhaps, the best synthesis of this feeling is
 found in three lines of Milton's<em> Paradise Lost. </em>Says
 the "Fallen One": --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Here we may reign secure; and in my choice,<br>
 To reign is worth ambition, though in hell!<br>
 Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven . . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Better be man, the crown of terrestrial production and king over
 its<em> opus operatum, </em>than be lost among the will-less spiritual
 Hosts in Heaven.
 </p><p>
 We have said elsewhere that the dogma of the first <em>Fall </em>rested
 on a few verses in <em>Revelation; </em>these verses being now
 shown a plagiarism from Enoch by some scholars. These grew into
 endless theories and speculations, which gradually acquired the
 importance of dogma and inspired tradition. Every one wanted to
 explain the verse about the seven-headed dragon with his ten horns
 and seven crowns, whose tail</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 485 THE SONS OF ETERNITY.
 </p><p>
 "drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast
 them to the earth," and whose place, with that of his angels,
 "was found no more in heaven." What the seven heads
 of the Dragon (cycle) mean, and its <i>five </i>wicked kings also,
 may be learned in the <em>Addenda </em>which close Part <strong>III</strong>.
 of this Volume.
 </p><p>
 From Newton to Bossuet speculations were incessantly evolved in
 Christian brains with regard to these obscure verses. . . . .
 "The star that falls, is the heresiarch Theodosius"
 . . . . explains Bossuet. "The clouds of smoke, are the heresies
 of the Montanists. . . . . The third part of the stars, are the
 martyrs, and especially the doctors of divinity. . . . ."
 </p><p>
 Bossuet ought to have known, however, that the events described
 in <em>Revelation </em>were not original, and may, as shown, be
 found in other and pagan traditions. There were no scholastics
 nor Montanists during Vedic times, nor yet far later in China.
 But Christian <em>theology </em>had to be <em>protected and saved.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 This was only natural. But why should truth be sacrificed in order
 to protect from destruction the lucubrations of Christian theologians?
 </p><p>
 The<em> princeps aeris hujus, </em>the "prince of the air"
 of St. Paul, is not the devil, but the effects of the astral light,
 as Eliphas Levi correctly explains. The Devil is not "the
 God <em>of this period," </em>as he says, for it is the deity
 of every age and period, since man appeared on earth, and matter,
 in its countless forms and states, had to fight for its evanescent
 existence against other disintegrating Forces.
 </p><p>
 The "Dragon" is simply the symbol of the cycle and of
 the "Sons of Manvantaric Eternity," who had descended
 on earth during a certain epoch of its formative period. The "clouds
 of smoke" are a geological phenomenon. The "third part
 of the stars of heaven" cast down to the earth -- refers
 to the divine Monads, (the Spirits of the Stars in Astrology)
 that circumambulate our globe; <em>i.e.</em>, the<em> human </em>Egos
 destined to perform the whole cycle of incarnations. This sentence,
 <em>qui</em> <em>circumambulat terram</em>, however, is again
 referred to the <strong>D</strong>EVIL in theology, the mythical
 father of Evil being said to "fall like lightning."
 Unfortunately for this interpretation, the "Son of Man,"
 or Christ, is expected, on the personal testimony of Jesus, to
 descend on earth likewise, "As the lightning cometh out of
 the East,"* just in the same shape and under the same symbol
 as Satan, who is seen "as lightning to fall from heaven."**
 All these metaphors and figures of speech, pre-eminently Oriental
 in their character, must have their origin searched for in the
 East. In all the ancient cosmogonies <i>light </i>comes from <em>darkness.
 </em>In Egypt, as elsewhere, <em>darkness </em>was "the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Matthew xxiv. 27.
 </p><p>
 ** Luke x. 18.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 486 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 principle of all things." Hence Pymander, the "Thought
 <em>divine</em>," issues as <em>light </em>from DARKNESS.
 <em>Behemoth* </em>is the principle of Darkness, or <em>Satan,
 </em>in Roman Catholic Theology, and yet Job says of him that
 "Behemoth is the chief (principle) of the ways of God"
 (xl. 19) -- <em>"Principium viarum Domini Behemoth!"</em><i>
 </i>
 </p><p>
 Consistency does not seem to be a favourite virtue in any portion
 of divine Revelation, so-called -- not as interpreted by theologians,
 at any rate.
 </p><p>
 The Egyptians and the Chaldeans referred the birth of their <em>divine</em>
 <em>Dynasties </em>to that period when creative Earth was in her
 last final throes, in giving birth to her prehistoric mountain
 ranges, which have since disappeared, her seas and her continents.
 Her face was covered with "deep Darkness and in that (Secondary)
 Chaos was the principle of all things" that developed on
 the globe later on. And our geologists have ascertained that there
 was such a terrestrial conflagration in the early geological periods,
 several hundred millions of years ago.** As to the tradition itself,
 every country and nation had it, each under its respective national
 form.
 </p><p>
 It is not alone Egypt, Greece, Scandinavia or Mexico, that had
 their Typhon, Python, Loki and its "falling" Demon,
 but China, also. The Celestials have a whole literature upon the
 subject. In <em>King, </em>it is said that in consequence of a
 rebellion against <em>Ti</em> of a proud Spirit who said he was
 <em>Ti</em> himself, seven choirs of celestial spirits were exiled
 upon earth, which <em>"brought a change in all nature, </em>heaven
 itself <em>bending</em> down and uniting with earth."
 </p><p>
 And in the "Y-King," one reads: "The flying Dragon,
 superb and rebellious, suffers now, and his pride is punished;
 he thought he would reign in heaven, he reigns only on the earth."
 </p><p>
 Again, the <em>Tchoon-Tsieoo </em>says allegorically: "one
 night the stars ceased shining in darkness, and deserted it, falling
 down like rain upon the earth, <em>where they are now hidden."
 </em>These stars are the Monads.
 </p><p>
 Chinese cosmogonies have their "Lord of the Flame" and
 their "Celestial Virgin," with little "Spirits
 to help and minister to her; and big Spirits to fight those who
 are the enemies of other gods." But all this does not prove
 that the said allegories are <em>presentments </em>or <em>prophetic
 </em>writings which all refer to Christian theology.
 </p><p>
 The best proof one can offer to Christian Theologians that the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Protestant Bible defines Behemoth <em>innocently</em> --
 "The <em>elephant </em>as some think" (See marginal
 note in Job xl. 19) in the authorised versions.
 </p><p>
 ** Astronomy, however, knows nothing of stars that have <em>disappeared
 </em>unless from visibility, never from existence, since the Science
 of Astronomy became known. Temporary stars are only <em>variable</em>
 stars, and it is believed even that the <em>new</em> stars of
 Kepler and Tycho Brahe may still be seen.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 487 THE SHADOWS OF THE SHADOWS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 esoteric meaning in the Bible -- in both Testaments -- was the
 assertion of the same idea as in our Archaic teachings -- to wit,
 that the "Fall of the Angels" referred simply to the
 incarnation of angels "who had broken through the Seven Circles"
 -- is found in the <em>Zohar. </em>Now the Kabala of Simeon Ben
 Iochai is the soul and essence of its allegory, as the later <em>Christian</em>
 Kabala<em> </em>is the "dark cloaked" Mosaic Pentateuch.
 And it says (in the Agrippa <strong>MSS</strong>.):
 </p><p>
 "The wisdom of the Kabala rests in the science of the equilibrium
 and Harmony."
 </p><p>
 "Forces that manifest without having been first equilibrized
 perish in space" ("equilibrized" meaning differentiated).
 </p><p>
 "Thus perished the first Kings (the Divine Dynasties) of
 the ancient world, the <em>self-produced </em>Princes of giants.
 They fell like rootless trees, and were seen no more: for <em>they
 were the Shadow of the Shadow</em>"<em>; </em>to wit, the
 <em>chhaya </em>of the Shadowy Pitris. (<i>Vide</i> about the
 "Kings of Edom.")
 </p><p>
 "But those that came after them, who shooting down like falling
 stars were enshrined in the shadows -- prevailed and to this day":
 Dhyanis, who by incarnating in those "empty shadows,"
 inaugurated the era of mankind.
 </p><p>
 Every sentence in the ancient cosmogonies, unfolds to him who
 can read between the lines the identity of the ideas, though under
 different garbs.
 </p><p>
 The first lesson taught in Esoteric philosophy is, that the incognizable
 Cause does not put forth evolution, whether consciously or unconsciously,
 but only exhibits periodically <em>different aspects of itself</em>
 to the perception of <em>finite </em>Minds. Now the collective
 Mind -- the Universal -- composed of various and numberless Hosts
 of Creative Powers, however infinite in manifested Time, is still
 finite when contrasted with the unborn and undecaying Space in
 its supreme essential aspect. That which is finite cannot be perfect.
 Therefore there are inferior Beings among those Hosts, but there
 never were any <em>devils </em>or "disobedient Angels,"
 for the simple reason that they are all governed by Law. The<em>
 Asuras </em>who incarnated (call them by any other name), followed
 in this a law as implacable as any other. They had manifested
 prior to the Pitris, and as time (in Space) proceeds in Cycles,
 their turn had come -- hence the numerous allegories <em>(Vide
 "Demon est Deus inversus,"</em> Part <strong>II</strong>.,
 Vol. I.). The name of <em>Asura </em>was first given by the Brahmans
 indiscriminately to those who opposed their mummeries and sacrifices,
 as the great <em>Asura </em>called "Asurendra" did.
 It is to those ages, probably, that the origin of the idea of
 the demon, as opposer and adversary, has to be traced.
 </p><p>
 The Hebrew Elohim, called in the translations "God,"
 and who create "light," are identical with the Aryan
 Asuras. They are also</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 488 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
 </p><p>
 referred to as the "Sons of Darkness" as a philosophical
 and logical contrast to light immutable and eternal. The earliest
 Zoroastrians did not believe in Evil or Darkness being <em>co-eternal
 </em>with Good or Light, and they give the same interpretation.
 Ahriman is the manifested <em>shadow</em> of <strong>A</strong>HURA-MAZDA
 <em>(Asura-mazda), </em>himself issued from <em>Zeruana Akerne</em>
 "boundless (circle of) Time" or the Unknown Cause. "Its
 glory," they say of the latter, "is too exalted, its
 light too resplendent for either human intellect or mortal eye
 to grasp and see." Its primal emanation <em>is eternal light,
 which, from having been previously concealed in </em><strong>D</strong>ARKNESS<em>
 was called to manifest itself and thus was formed Ormazd, the</em>
 <em>"King of Life." </em>He is the "first-born"
 in BOUNDLESS TIME, but, like his own antitype (pre-existing Spiritual
 idea), <em>has lived within darkness from</em> <em>all eternity.
 </em>The six Amshaspends (seven with himself, chief of all), the
 <em>primitive Spiritual Angels and Men </em>are <em>collectively
 his Logos. </em>The Zoroastrian Amshaspends create the world in
 six days or periods also, and rest on the Seventh; whereas that
 <em>Seventh </em>is the <em>first </em>period or "day,"
 in esoteric philosophy, (<em>Primary </em>creation in the Aryan
 cosmogony). It is that intermediate AEon which is the <em>Prologue
 </em>to creation, and which stands on the borderland between the
 uncreated eternal Causation and the produced finite effects; a
 state of <em>nascent </em>activity and energy as the first aspect
 of the eternal immutable Quiescence. In <em>Genesis, </em>on which
 no metaphysical energy has been spent, but only an extraordinary
 acuteness and ingenuity to veil the esoteric Truth, "Creation"
 begins at the third stage of manifestation. "God" or
 the <em>Elohim </em>are the "Seven Regents" of Pymander.
 They are identical with all the other Creators.
 </p><p>
 But even in Genesis that <em>period </em>is hinted at by the abruptness
 of the picture, and the <em>"darkness" </em>that was
 on the face of the deep. The <em>Alahim </em>are shown to "create"
 -- that is to say, to build or to produce the two or "double
 heaven" (<em>not</em> Heaven and Earth); which means, in
 so many words, that they separated the upper manifested (angelic)
 heaven, or plane of consciousness, from the lower or terrestrial
 plane; the (to us) eternal and immutable <em>AEons</em> from those
 periods that are in space, time and duration; Heaven from Earth,
 the unknown from the KNOWN -- to the profane. Such is the meaning
 of the sentence in Pymander, which says that: "<strong>T</strong>HOUGHT,
 the divine, which is <strong>L</strong>IGHT and <strong>L</strong>IFE
 (Zeruana Akerne) produced through its <strong>W</strong>ORD, or
 first aspect," the <em>other, operating </em><strong>T</strong>HOUGHT,
 which being the god of Spirit and Fire, constructed <em>seven
 Regents </em>enclosing within their circle the world of Senses,
 named "fatal destiny." The latter refers to Karma; the
 "seven circles" are the seven planets and planes, as
 also the seven invisible Spirits, in the angelic spheres, whose
 visible symbols are the seven planets,* the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Another proof, if any were needed, that the ancient Initiates
 knew of more than seven planets is to be found in the Vishnu Purana,
 Book <strong>II</strong>., ch. xii., where, describing [[continued
 on following page]]</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 489 THE ONE PASSIVE DEITY.
 </p><p>
 seven <em>Rishis </em>of the great Bear and other glyphs. As said
 of the Adityas by Roth: "they are neither sun, nor moon,
 nor stars, nor dawn, but the eternal sustainers of this luminous
 life which exists as it were behind all these phenomena."
 </p><p>
 It is they -- the "Seven Hosts" -- who, having "considered
 in their Father (<i>divine</i> Thought) the plan of the operator,"
 as says Pyrnander, <em>desired </em>to operate (or build the world
 with its creatures) likewise; for, having been born <em>"within
 </em>the sphere of operation" -- the manifesting Universe
 -- such is the Manvantaric <strong>L</strong>AW. And now comes
 the second portion of the passage, or rather of two passages merged
 into one to conceal the full meaning. Those who were born within
 the sphere of operation were "the brothers who loved him
 well." The latter -- the "him" -- were the primordial
 angels: the Asuras, the Ahriman, the Elohim -- or "Sons of
 God," of whom <em>Satan </em>was one -- all those spiritual
 beings who were called the "Angels of Darkness," because
 that darkness is <em>absolute </em>light, a fact now neglected
 if not entirely forgotten in theology. Nevertheless, the spirituality
 of those much abused "Sons of Light" which is Darkness,
 must be evidently as great in comparison with that of the Angels
 next in order, as the ethereality of the latter would be, when
 contrasted with the density of the human body. The former are
 the "First-born"; therefore so near to the confines
 of pure quiescent Spirit as to be merely the "PRIVATIONS"
 -- in the Aristotelian sense -- the <em>ferouers </em>or the ideal
 types of those who followed. They could not create material, <em>corporeal</em>
 <em>things; </em>and, therefore, were said in process of time
 to <em>have refused to</em> create, as <em>commanded by </em>"<em>God</em>"
 -- otherwise, TO HAVE REBELLED.
 </p><p>
 Perchance, this is justified on that principle of the <em>Scientific
 </em>theory which teaches us about light and sound and the effect
 of two waves of equal length meeting. "If the two sounds
 be of the same intensity, their coincidence produces a sound four
 times the intensity of either, while their interference produces
 <em>absolute silence."</em><i> </i>
 </p><p>
 Explaining some of the "heresies" of his day, Justin
 Martyr shows the identity of all the world religions at their
 starting points. The first <em>beginning </em>opens invariably
 with the <em>unknown </em>and PASSIVE deity, from which emanates
 a certain active power or virtue, the Mystery that is sometimes
 called <strong>W</strong>ISDOM, sometimes the <strong>S</strong>ON,
 very often God, Angel, Lord, and<strong> L</strong>OGOS.* The
 latter is sometimes applied to the very first emanation, but in
 several systems it proceeds from the first androgyne or double
 ray produced at the beginning by the unseen. Philo depicts this
 wisdom as male and female. But though its first manifestation
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Continued from preceding page]] the chariots attached to Dhruva
 (the pole star), Parasara speaks of "the chariots of the
 NINE planets," which are attached by aerial cords.
 </p><p>
 * Justin: "Cum. Trypho," p. 284.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 490 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 had a beginning, for it proceeded from <em>Oulom* </em>(Aion,
 time), the highest of the AEons when emitted from the Father,
 it had remained with him <em>before all creations, </em>for it
 is part of him.** Therefore, Philo Judaeus calls Adam Kadmon <em>"mind"
 </em>(the Ennoia of <em>Bythos </em>in the Gnostic system). "The
 mind, let it be named Adam.***
 </p><p>
 As the old Magian books explain it, the whole <em>event</em> becomes
 clear. A thing can only exist through its opposite -- Hegel teaches
 us, and only a little philosophy and spirituality are needed to
 comprehend the origin of the later dogma, which is so truly satanic
 and infernal in its cold and cruel wickedness. The Magians accounted
 for the origin of evil in their exoteric teachings in this way.
 "Light can produce nothing but light, and can never be the
 origin of evil"; how then was the evil produced, since there
 was nothing co-equal or like the Light in its production? Light,
 say they, produced several Beings, all of them spiritual, luminous,
 and powerful. But a <strong>G</strong>REAT ONE (the "Great
 Asura," Ahriman, Lucifer, etc., etc.) had an <em>evil thought,
 </em>contrary to the Light. He doubted, and by that doubt he became
 dark.
 </p><p>
 This is a little nearer to the truth, but still wide of the mark.
 There was no "EVIL thought" that originated the opposing
 Power, but simply THOUGHT <em>per se; </em>something which, being
 cogitative, and containing design and purpose, is therefore finite,
 and must thus find itself naturally in opposition to pure quiescence,
 the as natural state of absolute Spirituality and Perfection.
 It was simply the law of Evolution that asserted itself; the progress
 of mental unfolding, differentiated from spirit, involved and
 entangled already with matter, into which it is irresistibly drawn.
 Ideas, in their very nature and essence, as conceptions bearing
 relation to objects, whether true or imaginary, are opposed to
 absolute THOUGHT, that unknowable ALL of whose mysterious operations
 Mr. Spencer predicates that nothing can be said, but that "it
 has no kinship of nature with Evolution" (<em>Principles
 of Psychology,</em>****<em> </em>474) -- which it certainly has
 not.
 </p><p>
 The <em>Zohar </em>gives it very suggestively. When the "Holy
 One" (the Logos) desired to create man, he called the <em>highest
 </em>host of Angels and said to them what he wanted, but they
 <em>doubted </em>the wisdom of this desire and answered: "Man
 will not continue one night in his glory" -- for
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * A division indicative of time.
 </p><p>
 ** Sanchoniathon calls time the oldest AEon, <em>Protogonos,</em>
 the<em> "first-born."</em><i> </i>
 </p><p>
 *** Philo Judaeus: "Cain and his Birth," p. xvii.
 </p><p>
 **** It is suggestive of that spirit of paradoxical negation so
 conspicuous in our day, that while the evolution hypothesis has
 won its rights of citizenship in science as taught by Darwin and
 Haeckel, yet both the eternity of the Universe and the pre-existence
 of a <em>universal consciousness, </em>are rejected by the modern
 psychologists. "Should the Idealist be right, the doctrine
 of evolution is a dream," says Mr. Herbert Spencer. (See
 foot note, pp. 1 and 2, Book <strong>II</strong>.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 491 THE ZOHAR ON THE FALLEN ONES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 which they were burnt (annihilated?), by the "Holy"
 Lord. Then he called another, lower Host, and said the same. And
 they contradicted the "Holy One": "What is the
 good of Man?" they argued. Still Elohim created man, and
 when man <em>sinned </em>there came the hosts of Uzza and Azael,
 and twitted God: "Here is the Son of Man that thou hast made,"
 they said. "Behold, he sinned!" Then the Holy One replied:
 "If you had been among them (men) you would have been worse
 than they." And he threw them from their exalted position
 in Heaven even down on the Earth; and "they were changed
 (into men) and sinned after the women of the earth"; (<em>Zohar,
 </em>9, b.). This is quite plain. No mention is made in <em>Genesis
 </em>of these "Sons of God" (chap. vi.) having been
 <em>punished </em>for it. The only reference to it in the Bible
 is in Jude (6). "And the angels which kept not their first
 estate but left their habitation, he hath reserved in <em>everlasting
 chains under darkness</em> <em>unto the judgment of the great
 day." </em>And this means simply that the "Angels,"
 doomed to incarnation, <em>are in the chains </em>of flesh and
 matter, under the <em>darkness of ignorance, </em>till the "Great
 Day," which will come as always after the seventh round,
 after the expiration of the "Week," on the <strong>S</strong>EVENTH
 <strong>S</strong>ABBATH, or in the post-Manvantaric Nirvana.
 </p><p>
 How truly esoteric and consonant with the Secret Doctrine is "<strong>P</strong>YMANDER
 the Thought Divine" of Hermes, may be inferred from its original
 and primitive translations in Latin and Greek only. On the other
 hand how disfigured it has been later on by Christians in Europe,
 is seen from the remarks and unconscious <em>confessions </em>made
 by de St. Marc, in his <em>Preface </em>and letter to the Bishop
 of Ayre, in 1578. Therein, the whole cycle of transformations
 from a Pantheistic and Egyptian into a mystic Roman Catholic treatise
 is given, and we see how <strong>P</strong>YMANDER has become
 what it is now. Still, even in St. Marc's translation, traces
 are found of the real <strong>P</strong>YMANDER -- the "Universal
 Thought" or "<strong>M</strong>IND." This is the
 <em>verbatim </em>translation from the old French translation,
 the original being given in the foot-note* in its quaint old French:
 --
 </p><p>
 "Seven men (principles) were generated in Man." "The
 nature of the harmony of the Seven of the Father and of the Spirit.
 Nature . . . .
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<strong>S</strong>ECTION 16 (chap. i., Mercure Trismegiste
 -- <strong>P</strong>IMANDRE . . . . " "Oh, ma pensee,
 que s'ensuit il? car je desire grandement ce propos. Pimandre
 dict, ceci est un mystere cele, jusques a ce jour d'hui. Car nature,
 soit mestant avec l'home, a produit le miracle tres merveilleux,
 aiant celluy qui ie t'ay dict, la nature de l'harmonie des sept
 du pere, et de l'esprit. <em>Nature ne s'arresta pas la,</em>
 mais incontinent a produict <em>sept homes, selon les natures
 des sept gouverneurs </em>en puissance des deux sexes et esleuez.
 . . . La generation de ces <em>sept </em>s'est donnee en ceste
 maniere . . . ."
 </p><p>
 And a gap is made in the translation, which can be filled partially
 by resorting to the Latin text of Apuleius. The commentator, the
 Bishop, says: "Nature produced in him (man) seven men"
 (seven principles).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 492 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 produced seven men in accordance with the seven natures of the
 Seven Spirits" "having in them, potentially, the two
 sexes."
 </p><p>
 Metaphysically, the Father and the Son are the "Universal
 Mind" and the "periodical Universe"; the "Angel"
 and the "Man." It is the <strong>S</strong>ON and the
 <strong>F</strong>ATHER at one and the same time; in Pymander,
 the <em>active </em>IDEA and the <em>passive </em>THOUGHT that
 generates it; the radical key-note in Nature which gives birth
 to the seven notes -- the septenary scale of the creative Forces,
 and to the seven prismatic <em>aspects </em>of colour, all born
 from the one <em>white ray, </em>or <strong>L</strong>IGHT --
 itself generated in DARKNESS.
 </p><p>
 ------
 </p><p>
 [[This page continued in next section.]]</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-2-05.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>