<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6><a name="DDE_LINK20">[[Vol. 2, Page]] 492 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</a>
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[This page continued from <a href="sd1-3-06.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h3>C.</h3>
 
 <h4><strong>T</strong>HE <strong>M</strong>ANY <strong>M</strong>EANINGS
 OF THE "<strong>W</strong>AR IN <strong>H</strong>EAVEN."
 </h4>
 
 <p>
 The Secret Doctrine points out, as a self-evident fact, that Mankind,
 collectively and individually, is, with all manifested nature,
 the vehicle (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>of the breath of One Universal
 Principle, in its primal differentiation; and (<em>b</em>) of
 the countless "breaths" proceeding from that One <strong>B</strong>REATH
 in its secondary and further differentiations, as Nature with
 its many <em>mankinds </em>proceeds downwards toward the planes
 that are ever increasing in materiality. The primary Breath informs
 the higher Hierarchies; the secondary -- the lower, on the constantly
 descending planes.
 </p><p>
 Now there are many passages in the Bible which prove on their
 face, <em>exoterically, </em>that this belief was at one time
 <em>Universal</em>;<em> </em>and the most convincing are the two
 chapters Ezekiel xxviii. and Isaiah xiv. Christian theologians
 are welcome to interpret both as referring to the great War before
 Creation, the Epos of Satan's rebellion, etc., if they so choose,
 but the absurdity of the idea is too apparent. Ezekiel addresses
 his lamentations and reproofs to the King of Tyre; Isaiah -- to
 King Ahaz, who indulged in the worship of idols, as did the rest
 of the nation, with the exception of a few Initiates (the <em>Prophets,
 </em>so called), who tried to arrest it on its way to exotericism,
 or idolatry, which is the same thing. Let the student judge.
 </p><p>
 In <i>Ezekiel</i> xxviii. it is said, "Son of Man, say unto
 the prince of Tyrus, thus saith the Lord God (as we understand
 it, the "god" <strong>K</strong>ARMA): Because thine
 heart <em>is </em>lifted up, and thou hast said I <i>am </i>a
 God . . . . and yet thou <em>art </em>a man . . . . behold I shall
 bring strangers upon thee . . . . and they shall draw their swords
 against the beauty of thy wisdom . . . . and they shall bring
 thee down to the pit . . . ." or Earth-life.
 </p><p>
 The origin of the "prince of Tyrus" is to be traced
 to, and sought in</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 493 THE REAL MEANING OF THE CHERUB.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the "divine Dynasties" of the iniquitous Atlanteans,
 the Great Sorcerers (See last Comments, on Stanza <strong>XII</strong>.,
 verses 47-49). There is no metaphor in the words of Ezekiel, but
 actual <em>history, </em>this time. For the voice <em>in</em>
 the prophet, the voice of the "Lord," his own Spirit,
 which spake unto him, says: -- "Because thou hast said, 'I
 <em>am</em> a God, I sit in the seat of God(s) -- (divine Dynasties),
 in <em>the midst of the seas</em>,' yet thou art a man. . . .
 . Behold thou <em>art </em>wiser than Daniel; there is no secret
 that they can hide from thee: with thy wisdom . . . thou hast
 increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of
 thy riches. Behold therefore . . . strangers shall draw their
 swords against the beauty of thy wisdom . . . they shall bring
 thee down . . . and thou shalt die the deaths <em>of them that
 are </em>slain <em>in the midst of the seas.</em>" (Verses
 3-8.) All such imprecations are not <em>prophecy, </em>but simply
 <em>reminders </em>of the fate of the Atlanteans, the "Giants
 on Earth."
 </p><p>
 What can be the meaning of this last sentence if it is not a narrative
 of the fate of the Atlanteans? Verse 17 saying, "thine heart
 was lifted up because of thy beauty," may refer to the "Heavenly
 Man" in Pymander, or to the Fallen Angels, who are accused
 of having fallen through pride on account of the great beauty
 and wisdom which became their lot. There is no metaphor here,
 except in the preconceived ideas of our theologians, perhaps.
 These verses relate to the Past and belong more to the Knowledge
 acquired at the mysteries of Initiation than to retrospective
 clairvoyance! Says the voice, again: --
 </p><p>
 "Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of God (in the Satya
 Yuga) every precious stone was thy covering . . . . the workmanship
 of thy tabrets and thy pipes <em>was prepared in thee </em>in
 the day <em>thou was created</em>. . . <em>Thou art the anointed
 cherub</em> . . . thou hast walked up and down in the midst of
 the stones of fire . . . thou wast perfect in thy ways from the
 day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. Therefore
 I will cast thee out of the <em>mountain of God </em>and destroy
 thee. . . . "
 </p><p>
 The "Mountain of God" means the "Mountain of <em>the
 Gods</em>"<em> or</em><i> </i>Meru, whose representative
 in the Fourth Race was Mount Atlas, the <em>last form of one of
 the divine Titans, </em>so high in those days that the ancients
 believed that the heavens rested on its top. Did not Atlas assist
 the giants in their war against the gods? (Hyginus). Another version
 shows the <em>fable </em>as arising from the fondness of Atlas,
 son of Iapetus and Clymene, for astronomy, and from his dwelling
 for that reason on the highest mountain peaks. The truth is that
 Atlas, "the mountain of the gods," and also the hero
 of that name, are the esoteric symbols of the Fourth Race, and
 his seven daughters, the Atlantides, are the symbols of its Seven
 Sub-races. Mount Atlas, according to all the legends, was three
 times as high as it is now; having sunk at two different times.
 It is of a volcanic origin, and therefore the voice </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 494 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 within Ezekiel says: "I will <em>bring forth a fire from
 the midst of thee, </em>it shall devour thee," etc. (v. 18).
 Surely it does not mean, as seems to be the case from the translated
 texts, that this fire was to be brought from the midst of the
 Prince of Tyrus, or his people, but from Mount Atlas, symbolising
 the proud race, learned in magic and high in arts and civilization,
 whose last remnant was destroyed almost at the foot of the range
 of those once gigantic mountains.
 </p><p>
 Truly, "thou shalt be a terror, and never <em>shalt </em>thou
 be <em>any more</em>";<em> as</em><i> </i>the very name of
 the race and its fate is now annihilated from man's memory. Bear
 in mind, that almost every ancient King and priest was an initiate;
 that from toward the close of the Fourth Race there had been a
 feud between the Initiates of the <em>Right </em>and those of
 the <em>Left </em>Path; finally, that the garden of Eden is referred
 to by other personages than the Jews of the <em>Adamic </em>race,
 since even Pharaoh is compared to the fairest tree of Eden by
 this same Ezekiel, who shows "all the trees of Eden, the
 choicest and best of Lebanon, . . . comforted in the nether parts
 of the earth . . . ," for "they also went down into
 hell with him" (Pharaoh)* unto the nether parts, which are
 in fact the bottom of the ocean, whose floor gaped wide to devour
 the lands of the Atlanteans and themselves. If one bears all this
 in mind and compares the various accounts, then one will find
 out that the whole of chapters xxviii. and xxxi. of Ezekiel relate
 neither to Babylon, Assyria, nor yet Egypt, since none of these
 have been so destroyed, but simply fell into ruins on the <em>surface,</em>
 not<em> beneath </em>the earth -- but indeed to Atlantis and most
 of its nations. And he will see that the "garden of Eden"
 of the Initiates was no myth, but a locality now submerged. Light
 will dawn upon him, and he will appreciate such sentences as these
 at their true esoteric value: "Thou hast been in Eden; .
 . . thou wast upon the holy mountain of God" -- for every
 nation had and many still have <i>holy</i> mountains: some, Himalayan
 Peaks, others, Parnassus, and Sinai. They were all places of initiation
 and the abodes of the <em>chiefs </em>of the communities of ancient
 and even modern adepts. And again: "Behold, the Assyrian
 (why not Atlantean, Initiate?) was a cedar in Lebanon; . . . <em>his
 height was exalted above all the trees</em>;<em> </em>. . . .
 the cedars in the garden of God could not hide him, . . . so that
 all the trees of Eden . . . . envied him" (Ezekiel xxxi.
 3-9).
 </p><p>
 Throughout all Asia Minor, the Initiates were called the "trees
 of Righteousness," and the cedars of Lebanon, as also were
 some kings of Israel. So were the great adepts in India, but only
 the adepts of the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The only Pharaoh whom the Bible shows going down into the Red
 Sea was the king who pursued the Israelites, and who remained
 unnamed, for very good reasons, perhaps. The story was surely
 made up from the Atlantean legend.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 495 VARIOUS NAMES FOR INITIATES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 left hand. When Vishnu Purana narrates that "the world was
 overrun with trees," while the Prachetasas -- who "passed
 10,000 years of austerity in the vast ocean" -- were absorbed
 in their devotions, the allegory relates to the Atlanteans and
 the adepts of the early Fifth Race -- the Aryans. Other "<em>trees
 </em>(adept Sorcerers) spread, and overshadowed the unprotected
 earth; and the people perished . . . unable to labour for ten
 thousand years." Then the sages, the Rishis of the Aryan
 race, called Prachetasas, are shown "coming forth <em>from
 the</em> <em>deep,</em>"<em>* </em>and destroying by the
 wind and flame issuing from their mouths, the iniquitous "trees"
 and the whole vegetable kingdom; until Soma (the moon), the sovereign
 of the vegetable world, pacifies them by making alliance with
 the adepts of the <em>Right </em>Path, to whom he offers as bride
 Marisha, "the offspring of the trees."** This means
 that which is given in the Stanzas and Commentaries, and what
 is also given in Part <strong>II</strong>. of Vol. I., "The
 Sacred Island." It hints at the great struggle between the
 "Sons of God" and the Sons of the Dark Wisdom -- our
 forefathers; or the Atlantean and the Aryan Adepts.
 </p><p>
 The whole History of that period is allegorized in the <em>Ramayana,</em>
 which is the mystic narrative in epic form of the struggle between
 Rama -- the first king of the <em>divine</em> dynasty of the early
 Aryans -- and Ravana, the symbolical personation of the Atlantean
 (Lanka) race. The former were the incarnations of the Solar Gods;
 the latter, of the lunar Devas. This was the great battle between
 Good and Evil, between white and black magic, for the supremacy
 of the divine forces, or of the lower terrestrial or cosmic powers.
 If the student would understand better the last statement, let
 him turn to the <em>Anugita </em>episode of the Mahabharata, chapter
 v., where the Brahmana tells his wife, "I have perceived
 by means of the Self the seat abiding in the Self -- (the seat)
 where dwells the Brahman free from the pairs of opposites and
 the moon, together with the fire (or the sun), upholding (all)
 beings (as), the mover of the intellectual principle." The
 moon <em>is</em> the deity of the mind (Manas) but only on the
 lower plane. "Manas is dual -- <em>lunar </em>in the lower,
 <em>solar </em>in its upper portion," says a commentary.
 That is to say, it is attracted in its higher aspect towards Buddhi,
 and in its
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Vishnu Purana, Book I., ch. xv.
 </p><p>
 ** This is pure allegory. The waters are a symbol of wisdom and
 of occult learning. Hermes represented the sacred Science under
 the symbol of <em>fire</em>; the Northern Initiates, under that
 of water. The latter is the production of <em>Nara</em>, the "Spirit
 of God," or rather <em>Paramatman</em>, the "Supreme
 Soul," says Kulluka Bhatta, Narayana, meaning "he who
 abides in the deep" or plunged in the Waters of Wisdom --
 "water being the body of Nara" (<em>Vayu</em>). Hence
 arises the statement that for 10,000 years they remained in austerity
 "in the vast Ocean"; and are shown emerging from it.
 Ea, the God of Wisdom, is the "Sublime Fish," and Dagon
 or Oannes is the Chaldean man-fish, who emerges from the waters
 to teach wisdom.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 496 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 lower descends into, and listens to the voice of its <em>animal
 </em>soul full of selfish and sensual desires; and herein is contained
 the mystery of an adept's as of a profane man's life, as also
 that of the <em>post-mortem </em>separation of the divine from
 the animal man. The Ramayana -- every line of which has to be
 read esoterically -- discloses in magnificent symbolism and allegory
 the tribulations of both man and soul. "Within the body,
 in the midst of all these life-winds (? principles), which move
 about in the body, and swallow up one another,* blazes the Vaishvana
 fire** sevenfold, of which 'I' am the goal," says the Brahmana.***
 </p><p>
 But the chief "Soul" is <em>Manas </em>or mind; hence,
 Soma, the moon, is shown as making an alliance with the solar
 portion in it, personified as the Prachetasas. But of the seven
 keys that open the seven aspects of the Ramayana, as of every
 other Scripture, this is only one -- the metaphysical.
 </p><p>
 The symbol of the "Tree" standing for various Initiates
 was almost universal. Jesus is called "the tree of Life,"
 as also all the adepts of the good Law, while those of the <em>left
 </em>Path are referred to as the "withering trees."
 John the Baptist speaks of "the axe" which "is
 laid to the root of the trees" (Matth. iii. 10); and the
 King of Assyria's armies are called <em>trees </em>(Isaiah x.
 19).
 </p><p>
 The true meaning of the Garden of Eden was sufficiently given
 in "<em>Isis Unveiled.</em>"
 </p><p>
 The writer has more than once heard surprise expressed that <em>Isis</em>
 should contain so few of the doctrines now taught. This is quite
 erroneous. For the allusions to such teachings are plentiful,
 even if the teachings themselves were still withheld. The time
 had not arrived then, as the hour has not struck now <em>to say
 all. </em>"No Atlanteans, or the Fourth Race which preceded
 our Fifth Race, are mentioned in '<em>Isis Unveiled,</em>'<em>
 </em>"<em> </em>a critic on "Esoteric Buddhism"
 wrote one day. I, who wrote <em>Isis Unveiled, </em>maintain that
 the Atlanteans <em>are </em>mentioned as our predecessors, namely,
 in Volume I., p. 133, when speaking of the Book of Job. For what
 can be plainer than this: "In the original text, instead
 of 'dead things,' it is written dead <em>Rephaim,</em> giants,
 or mighty primitive men, from whom 'Evolution' <em>may one</em>
 <em>day trace our present race.</em>"<em> </em>It is invited
 to do so now, now that this hint is explained quite openly; but
 Evolutionists are as sure to
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This is explained by the able translator of Anugita in a foot-note
 (p. 258) in these words: "The sense appears to be this; the
 course of worldly life is due to the operations of the life-winds
 which are attached to the <strong>SELF</strong>, and lead to its
 manifestations as individual souls.
 </p><p>
 **" Vaisvanara (or Vaishvanara) is a word often used to denote
 the Self" -- explains Nilakantha. *** Translated by Kashinath
 Trimbak Telang, <strong>M.A</strong>., Bombay.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 497 TRACES OF PRE-HISTORIC STRIFES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 decline nowadays as they did ten years ago. Science and theology
 are against us: therefore we question both, and have to do so
 in self-defence. On the strength of hazy metaphors scattered throughout
 the prophets, and in St. John's Revelation, a grand but re-edited
 version of the Book of Enoch, on these insecure grounds Christian
 theology built its dogmatic Epos of the War in Heaven. It did
 more: it used the symbolical visions, intelligible only to the
 Initiates, as pillars upon which to support the whole bulky edifice
 of its religion; and now the pillars have been found very weak
 reeds, and the cunning structure is foundering. The entire Christian
 scheme rests upon these <em>Jakin </em>and <em>Boaz</em> -- the
 two contrary forces of good and evil, Christ and Satan the [[<em>agathai
 kai kakai dunameis</em>]]. Take away from Christianity its main
 prop of the Fallen Angels, and the Eden Bower vanishes with its
 Adam and Eve into thin air; and Christ, in the exclusive character
 of the One God and Saviour, and the victim of Atonement for the
 Sin of animal-man, becomes forthwith a useless, meaningless myth.
 </p><p>
 In an old number of the <em>Revue Archaeologique </em>for the
 year 1845 (p. 41), a French writer, M. Maury, remarks: -- "This
 universal strife between good and bad spirits seems to be only
 the reproduction of <em>another more ancient and more terrible
 strife, </em>that, according to an ancient myth, took place before
 the creation of the universe, between the faithful and the rebellious
 legions."
 </p><p>
 Once more, it is a simple question of priority. Had John's <em>Revelation</em>
 been written during the Vedic period, and were not one sure now
 of its being simply another version of the <em>Book of Enoch </em>and
 the Dragon legends of pagan antiquity -- the grandeur and the
 beauty of the imagery might have biased the critics' opinion in
 favour of the Christian interpretation of that first war, whose
 battle field was starry Heaven, and the first slaughterers --
 the Angels. As the matter stands now, however, one has to trace
 Revelation, event by event, to other and far older visions. For
 the better comprehension of the Apocalyptic allegories and of
 the esoteric <em>epos </em>we ask the reader to turn to <em>Revelation,</em>
 and to read chapter xii., from verse 1 to verse 7.
 </p><p>
 This has several meanings, most of which have been found out with
 regard to the astronomical and numerical keys of this universal
 myth. That which may be given now, is a fragment, a few hints
 as to its secret meaning, as embodying the record of a real war,
 the struggle between the Initiates of the two schools. Many and
 various are the still existing allegories built on that same foundation
 stone. The true narrative, that which gives the full esoteric
 meaning, is in the Secret books, but the writer has had no access
 to these.
 </p><p>
 In the exoteric works, however, the episode of the Taraka war,
 and some esoteric commentaries, may offer a clue perhaps. In every
 Purana</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 498 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the event is described with more or less variations, which show
 its allegorical character.
 </p><p>
 In the Mythology of the earliest Vedic Aryans as in the later
 <em>Puranic</em> narratives, mention is made of Budha, the "Wise";
 one "learned in the <em>Secret </em>Wisdom," and who
 is the planet Mercury in his euhemerization. The <em>Hindu Classical
 Dictionary </em>credits Budha with being the author of a hymn
 in the Rig Veda. Therefore, he can by no means be "a later
 fiction of the Brahmins," but is a very old personation indeed.
 </p><p>
 It is by inquiring into his genealogy, or theogony, rather, that
 the following facts are disclosed. As a myth, he is the son of
 Tara, the wife of Brihaspati the "gold coloured," and
 of "Soma" the (male) Moon, who, Paris-like, carries
 this new Helen of the Hindu sidereal Kingdom away from her husband,
 which causes a great strife and <em>war</em> in Swarga (Heaven).
 The episode brings on a battle between the gods and the Asuras:
 King Soma, finds allies in Usanas (Venus), the leader of the Danavas;
 and the gods are led by Indra and Rudra, who side with Brihaspati.
 The latter is helped by Sankara (Siva), who, having had for his
 guru Brihaspati's father, Angiras, befriends his son. Indra is
 here the Indian prototype of Michael, the Archistrategus and the
 slayer of the "Dragon's" angels -- since one of his
 names is <em>Jishnu</em> "leader of the (celestial) Host."
 Both fight, as some Titans did against other Titans in defence
 of revengeful gods, one -- of Jupiter <em>tonans </em>(in India,
 Brihaspati is the planet Jupiter, which is a curious coincidence);
 the other, in support of the ever-thundering Rudra Sankara. During
 this war, he is deserted by his body-guard, the storm-gods (Maruts).
 The story is very suggestive in some of its details.
 </p><p>
 Let us examine some of them, and seek to discover their meaning.
 </p><p>
 The presiding genius, or "regent" of the planet Jupiter
 is Brihaspati, the wronged husband. He is the instructor or spiritual
 guru of the gods, who are the representatives of the procreative
 powers. In the Rig Veda, he is called <em>Brahmanaspati, </em>a
 name meaning "the deity in whom <em>the action of the worshipped
 </em>upon the gods is personified." Hence Brahmanaspati represents
 the materialization of the <em>divine grace, </em>so to say, by
 means of ritual and ceremonies, or the exoteric worship.
 </p><p>
 "<strong>T</strong>ARA"* -- his wife -- is on the other
 hand the personification of the powers of one initiated into <em>Gupta
 Vidya </em>(secret knowledge), as will be shown.
 </p><p>
 <strong>S</strong>OMA is the moon astronomically; but in mystical
 phraseology, it is also the name of the sacred beverage drunk
 by the Brahmins and the Initiates during their mysteries and sacrificial
 rites. The "Soma" plant is the<em> asclepias acida,
 </em>which yields a juice from which that mystic beverage,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See Dowson's <em>Classical Dictionary.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 499 ALLEGORIES ON THE "WAR IN HEAVEN."
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 the<em> Soma </em>drink, is made. Alone the descendants of the
 Rishis, the <em>Agnihotri </em>(the fire priests) of the great
 mysteries knew all its powers. But the real property of the true
 Soma was (and <em>is</em>)<em> </em>to make a new <em>man </em>of
 the Initiate, after he is <em>reborn, </em>namely once that he
 begins to live in his <em>astral </em>body (See "The Elixir
 of Life"*); for, his spiritual nature overcoming the physical,
 he would soon snap it off and part even from that etherealized
 form.**
 </p><p>
 Soma was never given in days of old to the non-initiated Brahman
 -- the simple <em>Grihasta, </em>or priest of the exoteric ritual.
 Thus Brihaspati -- "guru of the gods" though he was
 -- still represented the dead-letter form of worship. It is Tara
 <em>his wife -- </em>the symbol of one who, though wedded to dogmatic
 worship, longs for true wisdom -- who is shown as initiated into
 his mysteries by King <em>Soma, </em>the giver of that Wisdom.
 Soma is thus made in the allegory <em>to carry her away. </em>The
 result of this is the birth of Budha -- <em>esoteric Wisdom --
 </em>(Mercury, or Hermes in Greece and Egypt). He is represented
 as "so beautiful," that even the husband, though well
 aware that Budha is not the progeny of his <em>dead-letter</em>
 worship -- claims the "new-born" as his Son, the fruit
 of his ritualistic and meaningless forms.*** Such is, <em>in brief,
 one </em>of the meanings of the allegory.
 </p><p>
 <em>War in Heaven </em>refers to several events of that kind on
 various and different planes of being. The first is a purely astronomical
 and cosmical fact pertaining to cosmogony. Mr. John Bentley thought
 that with the Hindus <em>war in Heaven </em>is only a figure referring
 to their calculations of time periods (see Bentley's <em>Hindu
 Astronomy</em>)<em>.*</em>***
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See "Five Years of Theosophy."
 </p><p>
 ** The partaker of <em>Soma </em>finds himself both linked to
 his external body, and yet away from it in his spiritual form.
 The latter, freed from the former, soars for the time being in
 the ethereal higher regions, becoming virtually "as one of
 the gods," and yet preserving in his physical brain the memory
 of what he sees and learns. Plainly speaking, <em>Soma </em>is
 the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge forbidden by the jealous Elohim
 to Adam and Eve or <em>Yah-ve</em>, "lest Man should become
 as one of us."
 </p><p>
 *** We see the same in the modern exoteric religions.
 </p><p>
 <em>**** "Historical Views of Hindu Astronomy.</em>"<em>
 </em>Quoting from the work in reference to Aryachatta, who is
 said to give a near approach to the true relation among the various
 values for the computations of the value of [[<i>pi</i>]], the
 author of the "Source of Measures" reproduces a curious
 statement. Mr. Bentley, it is said, "was greatly familiar
 with the Hindu astronomical and mathematical knowledge . . . this
 statement of his then may be taken as authentic: the same remarkable
 trait, among so many Eastern and ancient nations of <em>sedulously
 concealing the arcana of this kind of knowledge, is</em> <em>a
 marked one </em>among the Hindus. That which was given out to
 be popularly taught and to be exposed to public inspection, <em>was
 but the approximate of a more exact but hidden</em> <em>knowledge.
 </em>And this very formulation of Mr. Bentley will strangely exemplify
 the assertion; and explained, will show that it (the Hindu <i>exoteric</i>
 astronomy and sciences) was derived <em>from a system exact beyond
 the European one, </em>in which Mr. Bentley himself, of [[footnote
 continued on following page]]</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 500 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This served as a prototype, he thinks, for the Western nations
 to build their <em>war of the Titans </em>upon. The author is
 not quite wrong, but neither is he quite right. If the sidereal
 prototype refers indeed to a <i>pre</i>-manvantaric period, and
 rests entirely on the Knowledge claimed by the Aryan Initiates
 of the whole programme and progress of cosmogony,* the <em>war
 of the Titans </em>is but a legendary and deified copy of the
 real war that took place in the Himalayan <em>Kailasa </em>(heaven)
 instead of in the depths of Cosmic interplanetary Space. It is
 the record of the terrible strife between the "Sons of God"
 and the "Sons of the Shadow" of the Fourth and the Fifth
 Races. It is on these two events, blended together by legends
 borrowed from the exoteric account of the war waged by the Asuras
 against the gods, that every subsequent national tradition on
 the subject has been built.
 </p><p>
 Esoterically, the <em>Asuras, </em>transformed subsequently into
 evil Spirits and lower gods, who are eternally at war with the
 <i>great</i> deities -- are the gods of the Secret Wisdom. In
 the oldest portions of the Rig Veda, they are the spiritual and
 the <i>divine</i>, the term <em>Asura </em>being used for the
 Supreme Spirit and being the same as the great Ahura of the Zoroastrians.
 (See Darmesteter's <strong>V</strong>ENDIDAD). There was a time
 when the gods Indra, Agni, and Varuna themselves belonged to the
 <em>Asuras.</em> 
 </p><p>
 In the Aitareya Brahmana, the breath (<em>asu</em>)<em> </em>of
 Brahma-Prajapati became alive, and from that breath he created
 the Asuras. Later on, after the war, the Asuras are called the
 enemies of the gods, hence -- "A-suras," the initial
 "A" being a negative prefix -- or "<em>no</em>-gods"
 -- the "gods" being referred to as "Suras."
 This then connects the <em>Asuras</em> and their "Hosts,"
 enumerated further on, with the "Fallen Angels" of the
 Christian Churches, a hierarchy of spiritual Beings to be found
 in every Pantheon of ancient and even modern nations -- from the
 Zoroastrian down to that of the Chinaman. They are the sons of
 the primeval Creative Breath at the beginning of every new Maha
 Kalpa, or Manvantara; in the same rank as the Angels who had remained
 "faithful." These <em>were the allies of Soma </em>(the
 parent of the <em>Esoteric</em> <em>Wisdom</em>)<em> </em>as against
 <em>Brihaspati </em>(representing ritualistic or <em>ceremonial</em>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Continued from previous page]] course, trusted as far in advance
 of the Hindu Knowledge, at any time, in any generation."
 </p><p>
 Which is Mr. Bentley's misfortune, and does not take away from
 the glory of the ancient Hindu astronomers, who were all Initiates.
 </p><p>
 * The Secret Doctrine teaches that every event of universal importance,
 such as geological cataclysms at the end of one race and the beginning
 of a new one, involving a great change each time in mankind, spiritual,
 moral and physical -- is pre-cogitated and preconcerted, so to
 say, in the sidereal regions of our planetary system. Astrology
 is built wholly upon this mystic and intimate connection between
 the heavenly bodies and mankind; and it is one of the great secrets
 of Initiation and Occult mysteries.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Vol. 2, Page]] 501 SARPAS -- SERPENTS -- NAGAS.
 </p><p>
 worship). Evidently they have been degraded in Space and Time
 into opposing powers or demons by the ceremonialists, on account
 of their rebellion against hypocrisy, sham-worship, and the dead-letter
 form.
 </p><p>
 Now what is the real character of all those who fought along with
 them? They are (1) the<em> Usanas, </em>or the "host"
 of the planet Venus, become now in Roman Catholicism -- <em>Lucifer,
 </em>the genius of the "morning star" (see Isaiah xiv.,
 12), the<em> tsaba, </em>or army of "Satan." (2) The
 <em>Daityas </em>and<em> Danavas </em>are the Titans, the demons
 and giants whom we find in the Bible (<em>Gen. </em>vi.) -- the
 progeny of the "Sons of God" and the "Daughters
 of Men." Their generic name shows their alleged character,
 and discloses at the same time the secret <em>animus </em>of the
 Brahmins: for they are the <em>Krati-dwishas -- </em>the "enemies
 of the sacrifices" or exoteric <em>shams. </em>These are
 the "hosts" that fought against Brihaspati, the representative
 of <em>exoteric </em>popular and national religions; and Indra
 -- the god of the <em>visible </em>heaven, the firmament, who,
 in the early <em>Veda, </em>is the <em>highest </em>god of Cosmic
 heaven, the fit habitation for an <em>extra</em>-Cosmic and personal
 God, higher than whom no exoteric worship can ever soar.
 </p><p>
 (3) Then come the Nagas,* the <em>Sarpa </em>(serpents or Seraphs).
 These, again, show their character by the hidden meaning of their
 glyph. In Mythology they are <em>semi-divine </em>beings with
 a human face and the tail of a Dragon. They are therefore, undeniably,
 the Jewish <em>seraphim </em>(from <em>Serapis </em>and<em> Sarpa,
 </em>Serpent); the plural being <em>saraph, </em>"burning,
 fiery" (See Isaiah, vi. 23). Christian and Jewish angelology
 distinguishes between the Seraphim and the <em>Cherubim </em>or
 Cherubs, who come second in order; esoterically, and Kabalistically,
 they are identical; the <em>cherubim </em>being simply the name
 for the images or likenesses of any of the divisions of the celestial
 hosts. Now, as said before, the Dragons and <em>Nagas </em>were
 the names given to the Initiates-hermits, on account of their
 great Wisdom and Spirituality and their living in caves. Thus,
 when Ezekiel applies the adjective of <em>Cherub </em>to the King
 of Tyre, and tells him that by his <em>wisdom </em>and his <em>understanding
 </em>there is <em>no secret </em>that can be hidden from him (v.
 3, 4, xxviii.), he shows to an Occultist that it is a "prophet,"
 perhaps, still a follower of <em>exoteric </em>worship, who fulminates
 against an <em>Initiate </em>of another school and not against
 an imaginary Lucifer, a fallen cherub from the stars, and then
 from the garden of Eden. Thus the so-called "war" is,
 in one of its many meanings, also an allegorical record of the
 strife between the two classes of adepts -- of the right and of
 the left path. There were three classes of Rishis in India, who
 were
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <em>The Nagas </em>are described by the Orientalists as a mysterious
 people whose landmarks are found abundantly in India to this day,
 and who lived in <em>Naga dwipa </em>one of the <i>Seven</i> continents
 or divisions of <em>Bharatavarsha </em>(old India), the town of
 Nagpur being one of the most ancient cities in the country.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 502 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the earliest adepts known; the royal, or Rajarshis, kings and
 princes, who adopted the ascetic life; the Devarshis, divine,
 or the sons of Dharma or Yoga; and Brahmarshis, descendants of
 those Rishis who were the founders of <em>gotras </em>of Brahmans,
 or caste-races. Now, leaving the mythical and astronomical keys
 for one moment aside, the secret teachings show many Atlanteans
 who belonged to these divisions; and there were strifes and wars
 between them, <em>de facto </em>and<em> de jure. </em>Narada,
 one of the greatest Rishis, was a <em>Devarishi</em>;<em> </em>and
 he is shown in constant and everlasting feud with Brahma, Daksha,
 and other gods and sages. Therefore we may safely maintain that
 whatever the <em>astronomical </em>meaning of this universally
 accepted legend, its human phase is based on real and historical
 events, disfigured into a theological dogma only to suit ecclesiastical
 purposes. As above so below. Sidereal phenomena, and the behaviour
 of the celestial bodies in the heavens, were taken as a model,
 and the plan was carried out below, on earth. Thus, space, in
 its abstract sense, was called "the realm of divine knowledge,"
 and by the <em>Chaldees </em>or Initiates <em>Ab Soo, </em>the
 habitat (or Father, <em>i.e.</em>, the source) of knowledge, because
 it is in space that dwell the intelligent Powers which <em>invisibly
 </em>rule the Universe.*
 </p><p>
 In the same manner and on the plan of the Zodiac in the <em>upper</em>
 Ocean or the heavens, a certain realm on Earth, an inland sea,
 was consecrated and called "the Abyss of Learning";
 twelve centres on it in the shape of twelve small islands representing
 the Zodiacal signs -- two of which remained for ages the "mystery
 signs"** and were the abodes of twelve Hierophants and masters
 of wisdom. This "sea of knowledge" or learning*** remained
 for ages there, where now stretches the Shamo, or Gobi desert.
 It existed until the last great glacial period, when a
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Not less suggestive are the qualities attributed to Rudra Siva,
 the great <em>Yogi,</em> the forefather of all the Adepts -- in
 Esotericism one of the greatest Kings of the Divine Dynasties.
 Called "the Earliest" and the "Last," he is
 the patron of the Third, Fourth, and the Fifth Root-Races. For,
 in his earliest character, he is the ascetic <em>Dig-ambara, </em>"clothed
 with the Elements," <em>Trilochana, </em>"the <i>three</i>-eyed";
 <em>Pancha-anana, </em>"the five-faced," an allusion
 to the past four and the present fifth race, for, though <i>five</i>-faced,
 he is only "four-armed," as the fifth race is still
 alive. He is the "God of Time," Saturn-Kronos, as his
 <i>damaru</i> (drum), in the shape of an hour-glass, shows; and
 if he is accused of having cut off Brahma's fifth head, and left
 him with only four, it is again an allusion to a certain degree
 in initiation, and also to the Races.
 </p><p>
 ** G. Seiffarth's idea that the signs of the Zodiac were in ancient
 times only ten is erroneous. Ten only were known to the profane;
 the initiates, however, knew them all, <em>from the time of the
 separation of mankind into sexes, </em>whence arose the separation
 of Virgo-Scorpio into two; which, owing to a secret sign added
 and the <i>Libra </i>invented by the Greeks, instead of the secret
 name which was not given, made 12. (<em>Vide Isis Unveiled, </em>Vol.
 <strong>II</strong>., p. 456.)
 </p><p>
 *** The above is, perhaps, a key to the Dalai-Lama's symbolical
 name -- the "Ocean" lama, meaning the Wisdom Ocean.
 Abbe Huc speaks of it.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 503 THE MYTH OF BEL AND MERODACH.</h6>
 
 <p>
 local cataclysm, which swept the waters south and west and so
 formed the present great desolate desert, left only a certain
 oasis, with a lake and one island in the midst of it, as a relic
 of the <em>Zodiacal Ring </em>on Earth. For ages the watery abyss
 -- which, with the nations that preceded the later Babylonians,
 was the abode of the "great mother" (the terrestrial
 post-type of the "great mother chaos" in heaven), the
 parent of Ea (Wisdom), himself the early prototype of Oannes,
 the man-Fish of the Babylonians -- for ages, then, the "Abyss"
 or <em>Chaos</em> was the abode of wisdom and not of evil. The
 struggle of Bel and then of Merodach, the Sun-god, with <em>Tiamat,
 </em>the Sea and its Dragon, a "war" which ended in
 the defeat of the latter, has a purely cosmic and geological meaning,
 as well as an historical one. It is a page torn out of the History
 of the Secret and Sacred Sciences, their evolution, growth and
 DEATH -- <em>for the profane masses. </em>It relates (<em>a</em>)
 to the systematic and gradual drying up of immense territories
 by the fierce Sun at a certain pre-historic period; one of the
 terrible droughts which ended by a gradual transformation of once
 fertile lands abundantly watered into the sandy deserts which
 they are now; and (<em>b</em>) to the as systematic persecution
 of the Prophets of the Right Path by those of the Left. The latter,
 having inaugurated the birth and evolution of the sacerdotal castes,
 have finally led the world into all these exoteric religions,
 invented to satisfy the depraved tastes of the "<em>hoi polloi</em>"<em>
 </em>and the ignorant for ritualistic pomp and the materialization
 of the ever-immaterial and Unknowable Principle.
 </p><p>
 This was a certain improvement on the Atlantean sorcery, the memory
 of which lingers in the remembrances of all the literary and Sanskrit-speaking
 portion of India, as well as in the popular legends. Still it
 was a parody on, and the desecration of the Sacred Mysteries and
 their science. The rapid progress of anthropomorphism and idolatry
 led the early Fifth, as it had already led the Fourth Race, into
 sorcery once more, though on a smaller scale. Finally, even <em>the
 four</em> "<em>Adams</em>"<em> </em>(symbolizing under
 other names the four preceding races) were forgotten; and passing
 from one generation into another, each loaded with some additional
 myths, got at last drowned in that ocean of popular symbolism
 called the Pantheons. Yet they exist to this day in the oldest
 Jewish traditions, as the <em>Tzelem, </em>"the Shadow-Adam"
 (the <em>Chhayas </em>of our doctrine); the "model"
 Adam, the copy of the first, and the "male and female"
 of the exoteric genesis (chap. i.); the third, the "earthly
 Adam" before the Fall, an androgyne; and the Fourth -- the
 Adam after <em>his fall, i.e., </em>separated into sexes, or the
 pure Atlantean. The Adam of the garden of Eden, or the forefather
 of our race -- the fifth -- is an ingenious compound of the above
 four. As stated in <em>Zohar</em> (iii., fol. 4, col. 14, Cremona
 Ed.) Adam, the FIRST <em>man</em>, is not found</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 504 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 now on earth, he "is not found in all, below." Because,
 "where does the lower earth come from? <em>From the chain
 of the Earth, and heaven</em> <em>above,</em>"<em> i.e.,
 </em>from the superior globes, those which precede and are above
 our Earth. "And there came out from it (the chain) creatures
 of all kinds. Some of them in (solid) skins, some in shells (<em>Klippoth</em>)<em>
 . </em>. . some in red shells, some in black, some in white, and
 some of other colours . . . " (See<em> Qabbalah</em>).
 </p><p>
 As in the Chaldean Cosmogony of Berosus and the Stanzas just given,
 some treatises on the Kabala speak of creatures with two faces,
 some with four, and some with one face: for "the highest
 Adam did not come down in all the countries, or produce progeny
 and have many wives," but is a Mystery.
 </p><p>
 So is the Dragon a mystery. Truly, says Rabbi Simeon Ben-Iochai,
 that to understand the meaning of the Dragon is not given to the
 "Companions" (students, or <em>chelas</em>)<em>, </em>but
 only to "the little ones," <em>i.e</em>., the<em> perfect
 Initiates.* </em>"The work of the beginning the companions
 understand; but it is only the little ones who understand the
 parable on the work in the <em>Principium </em>by<em> the mystery
 of the serpent of the Great</em> <em>Sea.</em>"<em>** </em>And
 those Christians, who may happen to read this, will also understand
 by the light of the above sentence who their "Christ"
 was. For Jesus states repeatedly that he who "shall not receive
 the Kingdom of God as a <em>little child, </em>he shall not enter
 therein"; and if some of his sayings have been meant to apply
 to children without any metaphor, most of what relates to the
 "little ones" in the Gospels, related to the <em>Initiates,
 of whom Jesus was one. </em>Paul (Saul) is referred to in the
 Talmud as "the little one."
 </p><p>
 That "Mystery of the Serpent" was this: Our Earth, or
 rather <em>terrestrial life, </em>is often referred to in the
 Secret Teachings as the great Sea, "the sea of life"
 having remained to this day a favourite metaphor. The <em>Siphrah
 Dzeniouta </em>speaks of primeval chaos and the evolution of the
 Universe after a destruction (<em>pralaya</em>), comparing it
 to an uncoiling serpent: -- "Extending hither and thither,
 its tail in its mouth, the head twisting on its neck, it is enraged
 and angry. . . It watches and conceals itself. <em>Every thousand
 Days </em>it is manifested." (I., ยง 16).
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 * Such was the name given in ancient Judea to the Initiates, called
 also the "Innocents" and the "Infants," <em>i.e</em>.,
 once more reborn. This <em>key </em>opens a vista into one of
 the New Testament mysteries; the slaughter by Herod of the 40,000
 "Innocents." There is a legend to this effect, and the
 event which took place almost a century <strong>B.C.</strong>,
 shows the origin of the tradition blended at the same time with
 that of Krishna and his uncle Kansa. In the case of the N. T.,
 Herod stands for Alexander Janneus (of Lyda), whose persecution
 and murder of hundreds and thousands of Initiates led to the adoption
 of the Bible story.
 </p><p>
 ** Zohar ii., 34.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 505 THE SACREDNESS OF THE SERPENT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 A commentary on the Puranas says: "Ananta-Sesha is a form
 of Vishnu, the Holy Spirit of Preservation, and a symbol of the
 Universe, on which it is supposed to sleep during the intervals
 of the <em>Days </em>of Brahma. The seven heads of Sesha support
 the Universe. . . . "
 </p><p>
 So the Spirit of God "sleeps," is "breathing"
 (meracha' pheth') over the Chaos of undifferentiated matter, before
 each new "Creation." (<em>Siphrah Dzeniouta</em>)<em>.
 </em>Now one "Day" of Brahma is composed, as already
 explained, of <em>one thousand </em>Mahayugas; and as each "Night"
 or period of rest is equal in duration to this "day,"
 it is easy to see to what this sentence in <em>Siphrah Dzeniouta
 </em>refers, viz.: -- that the serpent manifests "once in
 a thousand days." Nor is it more difficult to see whither
 the initiated writer of the <em>Siphrah </em>is leading us, when
 he says: "Its head is broken in the waters of the great sea,
 as it is written: 'Thou dividest the sea by thy strength, thou
 brakest the <em>heads </em>of the <em>dragons</em> in the waters'
 " (lxxiv. 13). It refers to the trials of the Initiates in
 this physical life, the "sea of sorrow," if read with
 one key; it hints at the successive destruction of the seven spheres
 of a chain of worlds in the great sea of space, when read with
 another key: for every sidereal globe or sphere, every world,
 star, or group of stars, is called in symbolism "the Dragon's
 head." But however it may read, the Dragon was never regarded
 as Evil, nor was the Serpent either -- in antiquity. In the metaphors,
 whether astronomical, cosmical, theogonical or simply physiological,
 <em>i.e.</em>, phallic -- the Serpent was always regarded as a
 <em>divine </em>symbol. When it is said "The (Cosmic) Serpent
 which runs with 370 leaps" (<em>Siphrah Dzeniouta</em>, ยง
 33) it means the cyclic periods of the great Tropical year (25,868
 years), divided in the esoteric calculation into 370 periods or
 cycles, as one solar year is divided into 365 days. And if Michael
 was regarded by the Christians as the Conqueror of Satan, the
 Dragon, it is because in the Talmud this fighting personage is
 represented as the Prince of Waters, who had seven subordinate
 Spirits under him -- a good reason why the Latin Church made him
 the patron Saint of every promontory in Europe. In the Kabala
 (<em>Siph. Dzen</em>.)<em> </em>the creative Force "makes
 sketches and spiral lines of his creation <em>in the</em> <em>shape
 of a Serpent.</em>"<em> </em>It "holds its tail in its
 mouth," because it is the symbol of endless eternity and
 of cyclic periods. Its meanings, however, would require a volume,
 and we must end.
 </p><p>
 Thus the reader may now see for himself what are the several meanings
 of the "War in Heaven," and of the "great dragon."
 The most solemn and dreaded of church dogmas, the alpha and omega
 of Christian faith, and the pillar of its <strong>F</strong>ALL
 and <strong>A</strong>TONEMENT, dwindles down to a pagan symbol,
 in the many allegories about those prehistoric struggles.
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-2-06.htm">Next Section</a>
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>