<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 437 MORE IN THE FORTHCOMING VOLUMES.</h6>
 
 <h4>CONCLUSION.</h4>
 
 <p>
 Space forbids us to say anything more, and this part of the "Secret
 Doctrine" has to be closed. The forty-nine Stanzas and the
 few fragments from the Commentaries just given are all that can
 be published in these volumes. These, with some still older records
 -- to which none but the highest Initiates have access -- and
 a whole library of comments, glossaries, and explanations, form
 the synopsis of Man's genesis.
 </p><p>
 It is from the Commentaries that we have hitherto quoted and tried
 to explain the hidden meaning of some of the allegories, thus
 showing the true views of esoteric antiquity upon geology, anthropology,
 and even ethnology. We will endeavour in the Part which follows,
 to establish a still closer metaphysical connection between the
 earliest races and their Creators, the <em>divine </em>men from
 other worlds; accompanying the statements proffered with the most
 important demonstrations of the same in esoteric Astronomy and
 Symbolism.
 </p><p>
 In Volume <strong>III</strong>. of this work (the said volume
 and the<strong> IV</strong>th being almost ready) a brief history
 of all the great adepts known to the ancients and the moderns
 in their chronological order will be given, as also a bird's eye
 view of the Mysteries, their birth, growth, decay, and final death
 -- in Europe. This could not find room in the present work. Volume
 <strong>IV</strong>. will be almost entirely devoted to Occult
 teachings.
 </p><p>
 The duration of the periods that separate, in space and time,
 the Fourth from the Fifth Race -- in the historical* or even the
 legendary beginnings of the latter -- is too tremendous for us
 to offer, even to a Theosophist, any more detailed accounts of
 them. During the course of the post-diluvian ages -- marked at
 certain periodical epochs by the most terrible cataclysms -- too
 many races and nations were born, and have disappeared almost
 without leaving a trace, for any one to offer any description
 of the slightest value concerning them. Whether the Masters of
 Wisdom have a consecutive and full history of our race from its
 incipient stage down to the present times; whether they possess
 the uninterrupted record of man since he became the complete physical
 being, and became thereby the king of the animals and master on
 this earth -- is not for the writer to say. Most probably they
 have,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The word "historical" is used, because, although historians
 have dwarfed almost absurdly the dates that separate certain events
 from our modern day, nevertheless, once that they are known and
 accepted, they belong to history. Thus the Trojan War <em>is</em>
 an historical event; and though even less than 1,000 years <strong>B.C.</strong>
 is the date assigned to it, yet in truth it is nearer 6,000 than
 5,000 years <strong>B.C</strong>.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 438 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 and such is our own personal conviction. But if so, this knowledge
 is only for the <em>highest </em>Initiates, who do not take their
 students into their confidence. The writer can, therefore, give
 but what she has herself been taught, and no more.
 </p><p>
 But even this will appear to the profane reader rather as a weird,
 fantastic dream, than as a possible reality.
 </p><p>
 This is only natural and as it should be, since for years such
 was the impression made upon the humble writer of these pages
 herself. Born and bred in European, matter-of-fact and presumably
 civilized countries, she assimilated the foregoing with the utmost
 difficulty. But there are proofs of a certain character which
 become irrefutable and are undeniable in the long run, to every
 earnest and unprejudiced mind. For a series of years such were
 offered to her, and now she has the full certitude that our present
 globe and its human races must have been born, grown and developed
 in this, and in no other way.
 </p><p>
 But this is the personal view of the writer; and her orthodoxy
 cannot be expected to have any more weight than any other "doxy,"
 in the eyes of those to whom every fresh theory is heterodox until
 otherwise proved. Therefore are we Occultists fully prepared for
 such questions as these: "How does one know that the writer
 has not invented the whole scheme? And supposing <em>she </em>has
 not, how can one tell that the whole of the foregoing, as given
 in the Stanzas, is not the product of the imagination of the ancients?
 How could they have preserved the records of such an immense,
 such an incredible antiquity?"
 </p><p>
 The answer that the history of this world since its formation
 and to its end "is written in the stars," <em>i.e.,
 </em>is recorded in the Zodiac and the Universal Symbolism whose
 keys are in the keeping of the Initiates, will hardly satisfy
 the doubters. The antiquity of the Zodiac in Egypt is much doubted,
 and it is denied point-blank with regard to India. "Your
 conclusions are often excellent, but your premises are always
 doubtful," the writer was once told by a profane friend.
 To this, the answer came that it was one point, at least, gained
 on the scientific syllogisms. For, with the exception of a few
 problems from the domain of purely physical science, both the
 premises and conclusions of the men of Science are as hypothetical
 as they are almost invariably erroneous. And if they do not so
 appear to the profane, the reason is simply this: the said profane
 is very little aware, taking as he does his scientific data on
 faith, that both premises and conclusions are generally the product
 of the same brains, which, however learned, are not infallible;
 a truism demonstrated daily by the shifting and re-shifting of
 scientific theories and speculations.
 </p><p>
 However it may be, the records of the temples, Zodiacal and traditional,
 as well as the ideographic records of the East, as read by the
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 439 MODERN SCIENCE MISTRUSTED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 adepts of the Sacred Science and Vidya, are not a whit more doubtful
 than the so-called ancient history of the European nations, now
 edited, corrected, and amplified by half a century of archaeological
 discoveries, and the very problematical readings of the Assyrian
 tiles, cuneiform fragments, and Egyptian hieroglyphics. So are
 our data based upon the same readings, in addition to an almost
 inexhaustible number of Secret works of which Europe knows nothing
 -- <em>plus</em> the perfect knowledge by the Initiates of the
 symbolism of every word so recorded. Some of these records belong
 to an immense antiquity. Every archaeologist and palaeontologist
 is acquainted with the ideographic productions of certain semi-savage
 tribes, who from time immemorial have aimed at rendering their
 thoughts symbolically. This is the earliest mode of recording
 events and ideas. And how old this knowledge is in the human race
 may be inferred from some signs, evidently ideographic, found
 on hatchets of the Palaeolithic period. The red Indian tribes
 of America, only a few years ago comparatively speaking, petitioned
 the President of the United States to grant them possession of
 four small lakes, the petition being written on the tiny surface
 of a piece of a fabric, which is covered with barely a dozen representations
 of animals and birds. (See Lubbock.) The American savages have
 a number of such different kinds of writing, but not one of our
 Scientists is yet familiar, or even knows of the early hieroglyphic
 cypher, still preserved in some Fraternities, and named in Occultism
 the <em>Senzar. </em>Moreover, all those who have decided to regard
 such modes of writing -- <em>e.g.,</em> the ideographs of the
 Red Indians, and even the Chinese characters -- as "attempts
 of the early races of mankind to express their untutored thoughts,"
 will decidedly object to our statement, that writing was invented
 by the Atlanteans, and not at all by the Phoenicians. Indeed,
 such a claim as that writing was known to mankind many hundreds
 of millenniums ago, in the face of the philologists who have decreed
 that writing was unknown in the days of, and to Panini, in India,
 as also to the Greeks in the time of Homer, will be met by general
 disapprobation, if not with silent scorn. All denial and ridicule
 notwithstanding, the Occultists will maintain the claim, and simply
 for this reason: from Bacon down to our modern Royal Society,
 we have a too long period, full of the most ludicrous mistakes
 made by Science, to warrant our believing in modern scientific
 assumptions rather than in the denials of our Teachers. Writing,
 our scientists say, was unknown to Panini; and this sage nevertheless
 composed a grammar which contains 3,996 rules, and is the most
 perfect of all the grammars that were ever made! Panini is made
 out to have lived barely a few centuries <strong>B.C</strong>.,
 by the most liberal; and the rocks in Iran and Central Asia (whence
 the philologists and historians</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 440 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 show us the ancestors of the same Panini, the Brahmins, coming
 into India) are <em>covered with writing, </em>two and three thousand
 years old (12,000, according to some fearless palaeontologists).
 </p><p>
 Writing was an <em>ars incognita </em>in the days of Hesiod and
 Homer, agreeably to Grote, and unknown to the Greeks so late as
 770 <strong>B.C.</strong>; and the Phoenicians who had <em>invented
 </em>it, and knew writing as far back as 1500<strong> B.C</strong>.,
 at the earliest,* were living among the Greeks, and elbowing them,
 all the time! All these scientific and contradictory conclusions
 disappeared, however, into thin air, when Schliemann discovered
 (<em>a</em>) the site of ancient Troy, whose actual existence
 had been so long regarded as a fable; and (<em>b</em>), excavated
 on that site earthenware vessels with inscriptions <em>in characters
 unknown </em>to the paleontologists and the all-denying Sanskritists.
 Who will now deny Troy, or these Archaic inscriptions? As Professor
 Virchow witnesses: -- "I was myself an eye-witness of two
 such discoveries, and helped to gather the articles together.
 The slanderers have long since been silenced, who were not ashamed
 to charge the discoverer with an imposture."** Nor were truthful
 women spared any more than truthful men. Du Chaillu, Gordon-Cumming,
 Madame Merian,*** Bruce, and a host of others were charged with
 lying.
 </p><p>
 Madame Merian -- says the author of "<em>Mythical Monsters,</em>"<em>
 </em>who gives this information in the <em>Introduction</em> --
 was accused of deliberate falsehood in reference to her description
 of a bird-eating spider nearly two hundred years ago. But now-a-days
 reliable observers have confirmed it in regard to South America,
 India, and elsewhere. Audubon was accused by botanists of having
 invented the yellow water-lily, which he figured in his <em>Birds
 of the South </em>under the name of Nymphaea lutea, and after
 having lain under the imputation for years, was confirmed at last
 by the discovery of the long-lost flower in Florida in 1876 (<em>Pop.
 Sci. Monthly, </em>No. 60, April 1877). And, as Audubon was called
 <em>a liar </em>for this, and for his Holiaetus Washingtonii,****
 so Victor Hugo was ridiculed for . . . . his marvellous word-painting
 of the devil-fish, and his description of a man becoming its helpless
 victim. "The thing was derided as an impossibility; yet within
 a few years were discovered, on the shores of Newfoundland, cuttle
 fish with arms extending to thirty feet in length, and capable
 of dragging a good-sized
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is an historical fact that Sanchoniathon compiled and wrote
 in Phoenician characters -- from annals and State documents in
 the archives of <em>the older </em>Phoenician cities -- the full
 record of their religion in 1250 <strong>B.C</strong>.
 </p><p>
 ** Prof. Virchow, in Appendix I to Schliemann's <em>Ilios</em>.
 Murray, 1880.
 </p><p>
 *** Gosse writes of the latter: "She is set down a thorough
 heretic, not at all to be believed, a manufacturer of unsound
 natural history, an inventor of false facts in science."
 ("<em>Romance of</em> <em>Natural History</em>," p.
 227.)
 </p><p>
 **** Dr. Cover writes: "That famous bird of Washington was
 a myth; either Audubon was mistaken, or else, as some do not hesitate
 to affirm, <em>he lied </em>about it."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 441 A WHOLESALE DENIAL.</h6>
 
 <p>
 boat beneath the surface; and their action has been reproduced
 for <em>centuries past</em> . . . . by Japanese artists."
 ("<em>Mythical Monsters,</em>"<em> </em>p. 11 <em>Introd</em>.).
 </p><p>
 And if Troy was denied, and regarded as a myth; the existence
 of Herculaneum and Pompeii declared a fiction; the travels of
 Marco Polo laughed at and called as absurd a fable as one of Baron
 Munchausen's tales, why should the writer of "Isis Unveiled"
 and of the "Secret Doctrine" be any better treated?
 Mr. Charles Gould, the author of the above-cited volume quotes
 in his excellent work a few lines from Macmillan (1860), which
 are as true as life, and too much to the point not to be reproduced:
 "When a naturalist, either by visiting such spots of earth
 as are still out of the way, or by his good fortune, finds a very
 queer plant or animal, he is forthwith accused of <em>inventing
 </em>his game. . . . . . As soon as the creature is found to sin
 against preconception, the great (mis ?) guiding Spirit, <em>a
 priori </em>by name, who furnishes philosophers with their omniscience
 <em>pro re nata, </em>whispers that no such thing <em>can </em>be,
 and forthwith there is a charge of hoax. The heavens themselves
 have been charged with hoaxes. When Leverrier and Adams predicted
 a planet by calculation, it was gravely asserted in some quarters
 that the planet which had been calculated was not <em>the</em>
 planet but another which had clandestinely and improperly got
 into the neighbourhood of the true body. <em>The disposition to
 suspect hoax is stronger than the disposition to hoax. </em>Who
 was it that first announced that the classical writings of Greece
 and Rome were one huge hoax perpetrated by the monks in what the
 announcer would be as little or less inclined than Dr. Maitland
 to call the dark ages?" (p. 13).
 </p><p>
 Thus let it be. No disbeliever who takes the "Secret Doctrine"
 for a "hoax" is forced or even asked to credit our statements.
 These have already been proclaimed to be such by certain very
 clever American journalists before even the work went to press.*
 </p><p>
 Nor, is it after all, necessary that any one should believe in
 the Occult Sciences and the old teachings, before one knows anything
 or even
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * So far back as July, 1888, at a time when the <strong>MSS</strong>.
 of this work had not yet left my writing table, and the <em>Secret
 Doctrine </em>was utterly unknown to the world, it was already
 being denounced as a product of my brain and no more. These are
 the flattering terms in which the <em>Evening Telegraph </em>(of
 America) referred to this still unpublished work in its issue
 of June 30, 1888: "<em>Among the fascinating books for July</em>
 <em>reading </em>is Mme. Blavatsky's new book on Theosophy . .
 . (!) the <strong>S</strong>ECRET <strong>D</strong>OCTRINE. .
 . . But because she can soar back into the Brahmin ignorance .
 . . (! ?) . . . <em>is no proof</em> <em>that everything she says
 is true.</em>" And once the prejudiced verdict given on the
 mistaken notion that my book was out, and that the reviewer had
 read it, neither of which was or could be the case, now that it
 is really out the critic will have to support his first statement,
 whether correct or otherwise, and thus get out of it, probably
 by a more slashing criticism than ever.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 442 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 believes in his own soul. No great truth was ever accepted <em>a
 priori,</em> and generally a century or two passed before it began
 to glimmer in the human consciousness as a possible verity, except
 in such cases as the positive discovery of the thing claimed as
 a fact. The truths of to-day are the falsehoods and errors of
 yesterday, and <em>vice versa. </em>It is only in the <strong>XX</strong>th
 century that portions, if not the whole, of the present work will
 be vindicated.
 </p><p>
 It is no fact going against our statements, therefore, even if
 Sir John Evans does affirm that writing was unknown in the stone
 age. For it may have been unknown during that period in the Fifth
 Aryan race, and have been perfectly known to the Atlanteans of
 the Fourth, in the palmy days of their highest civilization. The
 cycles of the rise and fall of the nations and races are there
 to account for it.
 </p><p>
 If told that there have been cases before now of forged pseudographs
 being palmed off on the credulous, and that our work may be classed
 with Jacolliot's "Bible in India" (in which, by the
 way, there are more truths among its errors than are found in
 the works of orthodox and recognized Orientalists) -- the charge
 and comparison will dismay us very little. We bide our time. Even
 the famous "Ezour-Veda" of the last century, considered
 by Voltaire "the most precious gift from the East to the
 West," and by Max Muller "about the silliest book that
 can be read," is not altogether without facts and truths
 in it. The cases when the <em>a priori </em>negations of specialists
 became justified by subsequent corroborations form but an insignificant
 percentage of those that were fully vindicated by subsequent discoveries,
 and confirmed to the great dismay of the learned objectors. "Ezour
 Veda," was a very small bone of contention compared with
 the triumph of Sir William Jones, Anquetil de Perron, and others
 in the matter of Sanskrit and its literature. Such facts are recorded
 by Professor Max Muller himself, who, speaking of the discomfiture
 of Dugald Stewart and Co. in connection with this, states that
 "if the facts about Sanskrit were true, Dugald Stewart was
 too wise not to see that the conclusions drawn from them were
 inevitable. He therefore denied the reality of such a language
 as Sanskrit altogether, and wrote his famous essay to prove that
 Sanskrit had been put together after the model of Greek and Latin,
 by those arch-forgers and liars, the Brahmans, and that the whole
 of Sanskrit literature was an imposition" (<em>Science of
 Language,</em> p. 168). The writer is quite willing and feels
 proud to keep company with these Brahmans, and other <em>historical</em>
 "liars," in the opinion of our modern Dugald Stewarts.
 She has lived too long, and her experience has been too varied
 and personal, for her not to know at least something of human
 nature. "When you doubt, abstain," says the wise Zoroaster,
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 443 PARADOXES OF SCIENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 whose prudent aphorism is found corroborated in every case by
 daily life and experience. Yet, like St. John the Baptist, this
 sage of the past Ages is found preaching in the desert, in company
 with a more modern philosopher, namely Bacon, who offers the same
 priceless bit of practical Wisdom. "In contemplation,"
 he says (in any question of Knowledge, we add), "if a man
 begin with certainties, he shall end in doubts; but <em>if he
 will be content to begin with doubts, he shall end in</em> <em>certainties.</em>"
 </p><p>
 With this piece of advice from the father of English Philosophy
 to the representatives of British scepticism we ought to close
 the debate, but our theosophical readers are entitled to a final
 piece of Occult information.
 </p><p>
 Enough was said to show that evolution in general, events, mankind,
 and everything else in Nature proceed in cycles. We have spoken
 of seven Races, five of which have nearly completed their earthly
 career, and have claimed that every Root-Race, with its sub-races
 and innumerable family divisions and tribes, was entirely distinct
 from its preceding and succeeding race. This will be objected
 to, on the authority of uniform experience in the question of
 Anthropology, and Ethnology. Man was -- save in colour and type,
 and perhaps a difference in facial peculiarities and cranial capacity
 -- ever the same under every climate and in every part of the
 world, say the Naturalists: ay, even in stature. This, while maintaining
 that man descends from the same unknown ancestor as the ape, a
 claim that is logically impossible without an infinite variation
 of stature and form, from his first evolution into a biped. The
 very logical persons who maintain both propositions are welcome
 to their paradoxical views. Once more we address only those who,
 doubting the general derivation of myths from "the contemplation
 of the visible workings of external nature" . . . . think
 it, "less hard to believe that these wonderful stories of
 gods and demi-gods, of giants and dwarfs, of dragons and monsters
 of all descriptions, are transformations, than to believe them
 to be inventions." It is only such "transformations"
 in physical nature, as much as in the memory and conceptions of
 our present mankind, that the Secret Doctrine teaches. It confronts
 the purely speculative hypotheses of modern Science, based upon
 the experience and exact observations of barely a few centuries,
 with the unbroken tradition and records of its Sanctuaries; and
 brushing away that tissue of cobweb-like theories, spun in the
 darkness that covers a period of hardly a few millenniums back,
 and which Europeans call their "History," the Old Science
 says to us: Listen, now, to my version of the memoirs of Humanity.
 </p><p>
 The human Races are born one from the other, grow, develop, become
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 444 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 old, and die. Their sub-races and nations follow the same rule.
 If your all-denying modern science and so-called philosophy do
 not contest that the human family is composed of a variety of
 well-defined types and races, it is only because the fact is undeniable,
 no one would say that there was no external difference between
 an Englishman, an African negro, and a Japanese or Chinaman. On
 the other hand it is formally denied by most naturalists that
 <em>mixed human races, i.e., </em>the seeds for entirely new races,
 are any longer formed in our days. But this last is maintained
 on good grounds by de Quatrefages and some others.
 </p><p>
 Nevertheless our general proposition will not be accepted. It
 will be said that whatever forms man has passed through in the
 long pre-historic Past there are no more changes for him (save
 certain variations, as at present) in the future. Hence that our
 Sixth and Seventh Root Races are fictions.
 </p><p>
 To this it is again answered: How <em>do you </em>know? Your experience
 is limited to a few thousand years, to less than a day in the
 whole age of Humanity and to the present types of the actual continents
 and isles of our Fifth Race. How can you tell what will or will
 not be? Meanwhile, such is the prophecy of the Secret Books and
 their no uncertain statements.
 </p><p>
 Since the beginning of the Atlantean Race many million years have
 passed, yet we find the last of the Atlanteans, still mixed up
 with the Aryan element, 11,000 years ago. This shows the enormous
 overlapping of one race over the race which succeeds it, though
 in character and external type the elder loses its characteristics,
 and assumes the new features of the younger race. This is proved
 in all the formations of mixed human races. Now, Occult philosophy
 teaches that even now, under our very eyes, the new Race and Races
 are preparing to be formed, and that it is in America that the
 transformation will take place, and has already silently commenced.
 </p><p>
 Pure Anglo-Saxons hardly three hundred years ago, the Americans
 of the United States have already become a nation apart, and,
 owing to a strong admixture of various nationalities and inter-marriage,
 almost a race <em>sui generis, </em>not only mentally, but also
 physically. "Every mixed race, when uniform and settled,
 has been able to play the part of a primary race in fresh crossings,"
 says de Quatrefages. "Mankind, in its present state, has
 thus been formed, certainly, for the greatest part, by the successive
 crossing of a number of races <em>at present</em> <em>undetermined</em>"<em>
 </em>("<em>The Human Species</em>," <em>p.</em> 274.)
 </p><p>
 Thus the Americans have become in only three centuries a "primary
 race," <em>pro tem., </em>before becoming a race apart, and
 strongly separated from all other now existing races. They are,
 in short, the germs of the <em>Sixth </em>sub-race, and in some
 few hundred years more, will become</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 445 THE COMING NEW RACE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 most decidedly the pioneers of that race which must succeed to
 the present European or fifth sub-race, in all its new characteristics.
 After this, in about 25,000 years, they will launch into preparations
 for the seventh sub-race; until, in consequence of cataclysms
 -- the first series of those which must one day destroy Europe,
 and still later the whole Aryan race (and thus affect both Americas),
 as also most of the lands directly connected with the confines
 of our continent and isles -- the Sixth Root-Race will have appeared
 on the stage of our Round. When shall this be? Who knows save
 the great Masters of Wisdom, perchance, and they are as silent
 upon the subject as the snow-capped peaks that tower above them.
 All we know is, that it will silently come into existence; so
 silently, indeed, that for long millenniums shall its pioneers
 -- the peculiar children who will grow into peculiar men and women
 -- be regarded as anomalous <em>lusus naturae, </em>abnormal oddities
 physically and mentally. Then, as they increase, and their numbers
 become with every age greater, one day they will awake to find
 themselves in a majority. It is the present men who will then
 begin to be regarded as exceptional mongrels, until these die
 out in their turn in civilised lands; surviving only in small
 groups on islands -- the mountain peaks of to-day -- where they
 will vegetate, degenerate, and finally die out, perhaps millions
 of years hence, as the Aztecs have, as the Nyam-Nyam and the dwarfish
 Moola Koorumba of the Nilghiri Hills are dying. All these are
 the remnants of once mighty races, the recollection of whose existence
 has entirely died out of the remembrance of the modern generations,
 just as we shall vanish from the memory of the Sixth Race Humanity.
 The Fifth will overlap the Sixth Race for many hundreds of millenniums,
 changing with it slower than its new successor, still changing
 in stature, general physique, and mentality, just as the Fourth
 overlapped our Aryan race, and the Third had overlapped the Atlanteans.
 </p><p>
 This process of preparation for the Sixth great Race must last
 throughout the whole sixth and seventh sub-races (<em>vide supra,
 </em>the diagram of the Genealogical Tree of the Fifth Race).
 But the <em>last</em> remnants of the Fifth Continent will not
 disappear until some time after the birth of the <em>new </em>Race;
 when another and <em>new </em>dwelling, the sixth continent, will
 have appeared above the <em>new </em>waters on the face of the
 globe, so as to receive the new stranger. To it also will emigrate
 and settle all those who shall be fortunate enough to escape the
 general disaster. When this shall be -- as just said -- it is
 not for the writer to know. Only, as nature no more proceeds by
 sudden jumps and starts, than man changes suddenly from a child
 into a mature man, the final cataclysm will be preceded by many
 smaller submersions and destructions both by wave and volcanic
 fires. The exultant pulse will beat</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 446 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 high in the heart of the race now in the American zone, but there
 will be no more Americans when the Sixth Race commences; no more,
 in fact, than Europeans; for they will have now become a <em>new
 race, and</em> <em>many new nations. </em>Yet the Fifth will not
 die, but survive for a while: overlapping the new Race for many
 hundred thousands of years to come, it will become transformed
 with it -- slower than its new successor -- still getting entirely
 altered in mentality, general physique, and stature. Mankind will
 not grow again into giant bodies as in the case of the Lemurians
 and the Atlanteans; because while the evolution of the Fourth
 race led the latter down to the very bottom of materiality in
 its physical development, the present Race is on its ascending
 arc; and the Sixth will be rapidly growing out of its bonds of
 matter, and even of flesh.
 </p><p>
 Thus it is the mankind of the New world -- one by far the senior
 of our Old one, a fact men had also forgotten -- of <em>Patala
 </em>(the Antipodes, or the Nether World, as America is called
 in India), whose mission and Karma it is, to sow the seeds for
 a forthcoming, grander, and far more glorious Race than any of
 those we know of at present. The Cycles of Matter will be succeeded
 by Cycles of Spirituality and a fully developed mind. On the law
 of parallel history and races, the majority of the future mankind
 will be composed of glorious Adepts. Humanity is the child of
 cyclic Destiny, and not one of its Units can escape its unconscious
 mission, or get rid of the burden of its co-operative work with
 nature. Thus will mankind, race after race, perform its appointed
 cycle-pilgrimage. Climates will, and have already begun, to change,
 each tropical year after the other dropping one sub-race, but
 only to beget another higher race on the ascending cycle; while
 a series of other less favoured groups -- the failures of nature
 -- will, like some individual men, vanish from the human family
 without even leaving a trace behind.
 </p><p>
 Such is the course of Nature under the sway of <strong>K</strong>ARMIC
 <strong>L</strong>AW: of the ever present and the ever-becoming
 Nature. For, in the words of a Sage, known only to a few Occultists:--
 "<strong>T</strong>HE <strong>P</strong>RESENT IS THE <strong>C</strong>HILD
 OF THE <strong>P</strong>AST; THE <strong>F</strong>UTURE, THE
 BEGOTTEN OF THE <strong>P</strong>RESENT. <strong>A</strong>ND
 YET, <strong>O</strong> PRESENT MOMENT! <strong>K</strong>NOWEST
 THOU NOT THAT THOU HAST NO PARENT, NOR CANST THOU HAVE A CHILD;
 THAT THOU ART EVER BEGETTING BUT THYSELF? <strong>B</strong>EFORE
 THOU HAST EVEN BEGUN TO SAY '<strong>I </strong>AM THE PROGENY
 OF THE DEPARTED MOMENT, THE CHILD OF THE PAST,' THOU HAST BECOME
 THAT PAST ITSELF. <strong>B</strong>EFORE THOU UTTEREST THE LAST
 SYLLABLE, BEHOLD! THOU ART NO MORE THE <strong>P</strong>RESENT
 BUT VERILY THAT <strong>F</strong>UTURE. <strong>T</strong>HUS,
 ARE THE <strong>P</strong>AST, THE <strong>P</strong>RESENT, AND
 THE <strong>F</strong>UTURE, THE EVER-LIVING TRINITY IN ONE --
 THE <strong>M</strong>AHAMAYA OF THE <strong>A</strong>BSOLUTE
 <strong>IS</strong>."
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-2-01.htm">Next Section</a>
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>