<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 220 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE "<strong>S</strong>ONS OF <strong>G</strong>OD"
 AND THE "<strong>S</strong>ACRED <strong>I</strong>SLAND."
 </p><p>
 The <em>legend </em>given in <em>Isis </em>in relation to a portion
 of the globe which science now concedes to have been the cradle
 of humanity -- though it is but one of the <em>seven </em>cradles,
 in truth -- ran, condensed, and now explained, as follows: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Tradition says, and the records of the <i>Great Book </i>(the
 Book of Dzyan) explain, that long before the days of Ad-am, and
 his inquisitive wife, He-va, where now are found but salt lakes
 and desolate barren deserts, there was a vast inland sea, which
 extended over Middle Asia, north of the proud Himalayan range,
 and its western prolongation. An island, which for its unparalleled
 beauty had no rival in the world, was inhabited by the last remnant
 of the race which preceded ours."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 "The last <em>remnant</em>"<em> </em>meant the "Sons
 of Will and Yoga," who, with a few tribes, survived the great
 cataclysm. For it is the <em>Third </em>Race which inhabited the
 great Lemurian continent, that preceded the veritable and complete
 human races -- the fourth and the fifth. Therefore it was said
 in <em>Isis </em>that --
 </p><blockquote>
 "This race could live with equal ease in water, air, or fire,
 for it had an unlimited control over the elements. These were
 the 'Sons of God'; not those who saw the daughters of men, but
 the real <i>Elohim,</i> though in the oriental <i>Kabala </i>they
 have another name. It was they who imparted Nature's most weird
 secrets to men, and revealed to them the ineffable, and now <i>lost
 </i>'word.' "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The "Island," according to belief, exists to the present
 hour; now, as <em>an oasis </em>surrounded by the dreadful wildernesses
 of the great Desert, the Gobi -- whose sands "no foot hath
 crossed in the memory of man."
 </p><blockquote>
 "This word, which is no word, has travelled once around the
 globe, and still lingers as a far-off dying echo in the hearts
 of some privileged men. The hierophants of all the Sacerdotal
 Colleges were aware of the existence of this island; but the 'word'
 was known only to the <i>Java Aleim </i>(Maha Chohan in another
 tongue), or chief lord of every college, and was passed to his
 successor only at the moment of death. There were many such colleges,
 and the old classic authors speak of them.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "There was no communication with the fair island by sea,
 but subterranean passages, known only to the chiefs, communicated
 with it in all directions."*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Tradition asserts, and archaeology accepts the truth of the legend
 that there is more than one city now flourishing in India, which
 is built on
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * There are archaeologists, who, like Mr. James Fergusson, deny
 the great antiquity of even one single monument in India. In his
 work, "Illustrations of the Rock-Cut Temples of India,"
 the author ventures to express the very extraordinary opinion
 that "Egypt had ceased to be a nation before the earliest
 of the cave-temples of India was excavated." In short, he
 does not admit the existence of any cave anterior to the reign
 of Asoka, and seems anxious to prove that most of these rock-cut
 temples were executed during a period extending from the time
 of that pious Buddhist king until the destruction of the Andhra
 dynasty of Maghada, in the beginning of the fifth century. We
 believe such a claim perfectly arbitrary. Further discoveries
 will show that it is erroneous and unwarranted.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 221 THE CONTINENT OF THE GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 several other cities, making thus a subterranean city of six or
 seven stories high. Delhi is one of them; Allahabad another --
 examples of this being found even in Europe; <em>e.g</em>., in
 Florence, which is built on several defunct Etruscan and other
 cities. Why, then, could not Ellora, Elephanta, Karli, and Ajunta
 have been built on subterranean labyrinths and passages, as claimed?
 Of course we do not allude to the caves which are known to every
 European, whether <em>de visu </em>or through hearsay, notwithstanding
 their enormous antiquity, though that is so disputed by modern
 archaeology. But it is a fact, known to the Initiated Brahmins
 of India and especially to Yogis, that there is not a cave-temple
 in the country but has its subterranean passages running in every
 direction, and that those underground caves and endless corridors
 have in their turn <em>their </em>caves and corridors.
 </p><blockquote>
 "Who can tell that the lost Atlantis -- which is also mentioned
 in the <i>Secret Book, </i>but, again, under another name, pronounced
 in the sacred language -- did not exist yet in those days?"
 --
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 we went on to ask. It <em>did </em>exist most assuredly, as it
 was fast approaching its greatest days of glory and civilization
 when the last of the Lemurian continents went down.
 </p><blockquote>
 "The great lost continent might have, perhaps, been situated
 south of Asia, extending from India to Tasmania?* If the hypothesis
 (now so much doubted, and positively denied by some learned authors,
 who regard it as a joke of Plato's) is ever verified, then, perhaps,
 will the scientists believe that the description of the god-inhabited
 continent was not altogether a fable.** And they may then perceive
 that Plato's guarded hints and his attributing the narrative to
 Solon and the Egyptian priests, were but a prudent way of imparting
 the fact to the world, and, by cleverly combining truth and fiction,
 so disconnecting himself from a story which the obligations imposed
 at initiation forbade him to divulge.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "To continue the tradition, we have to add that the class
 of hierophants was divided into two distinct categories:*** those
 who were instructed by the 'Sons of God,' of the island, and who
 were initiated in the divine doctrine of pure revelation; and
 others who inhabited the lost Atlantis -- if such must be its
 name -- and who, being of another race, (born <i>sexually </i>but
 of <i>divine </i>parents), were born with a sight, which embraced
 all living things, and was independent of both distance and material
 obstacle. In short, they were the <i>Fourth </i>Race of men mentioned
 in the <i>Popol-Vuh, </i>whose sight was unlimited, and who knew
 all things at once."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 In other words, they were the Lemuro-Atlanteans, the first who
 had
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * America when discovered, was called <em>Atlanta </em>by some
 native tribes.
 </p><p>
 ** Since then Donnelly's <em>Atlantis </em>has appeared, and soon
 its actual existence will have become a scientific fact.
 </p><p>
 *** It is so divided to this day, and theosophists and Occultists,
 who have learned something of the Occult but undeniable power
 of Dugpaship at their own expense, know this but too well.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 222 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 a dynasty of <em>Spirit</em>-Kings, not of <em>Manes, </em>or
 "ghosts," as some believe (<em>See </em>"<em>Pneumatologie</em>"),
 but of actual living <em>Devas </em>(or demi-gods or <em>Angels,
 </em>again) who had assumed bodies to rule over them, and who,
 in their turn, instructed them in arts and sciences. Only, as
 they were <em>rupa </em>or material Spirits, these Dhyanis were
 not always good. Their King <em>Thevetata </em>was one of the
 latter, and it is under the evil influence of this King-Demon
 that . . . . the Atlantis-race became a nation of wicked <em>magicians.</em>
 
 </p><blockquote>
 "In consequence of this, war was declared, the story of which
 would be too long to narrate; its substance may be found in the
 disfigured allegories of the race of Cain, the giants, and that
 of Noah and his righteous family. The conflict came to an end
 by the submersion of the Atlantis, which finds its imitation in
 the stories of the Babylonian and Mosaic flood. The giants and
 magicians '. . . and all flesh died . . . and every man.' All
 except Xisuthrus and Noah, who are substantially identical with
 the great Father of the Thhnkithians in the <i>Popol-Vuh, </i>or
 the sacred book of the Guatemaleans, which also tells of his escaping
 in a large boat like the Hindu Noah -- Vaivasvata.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "If we believe the tradition at all, we have to credit the
 further story that, from the intermarrying of the progeny of the
 hierophants of the island and the descendants of the Atlantean
 Noah, sprang up a mixed race of righteous and wicked. On the one
 side the world had its Enochs, Moseses, various Buddhas, its numerous
 'Saviours,' and great hierophants; on the other hand, its '<i>natural
 </i>magicians' who, through lack of the restraining power of proper
 spiritual enlightenment, . . . perverted their gifts to evil purposes.
 . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 We may supplement this by the testimony of some records and traditions.
 In the "<em>Histoire des Vierges: Les Peuples et les Continents
 Disparus,</em>"<em> </em>the author says: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "One of the most ancient legends of India, preserved in the
 temples by oral and written tradition, relates that several hundred
 thousand years ago there existed in the Pacific Ocean an immense
 continent which was destroyed by geological upheaval, and the
 fragments of which must be sought in Madagascar, Ceylon, Sumatra,
 Java, Borneo, and the principal isles of Polynesia."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The high plateaux of Hindustan and Asia, according to this
 hypothesis, would only have been represented in those distant
 epochs by great islands contiguous to the central continent .
 . . . . According to the Brahmans, this country had attained a
 high civilization, and the peninsula of Hindustan, enlarged by
 the displacement of the waters, at the time of the grand cataclysm,
 has but continued the chain of the primitive traditions born in
 this place. These traditions give the name of <i>Rutas </i>to
 the peoples which inhabited this immense equinoctial continent,
 and from their speech <i>was derived the Sanscrit</i>. . . . .
 And the Indo-Hellenic tradition, preserved by the most intelligent
 population which emigrated from the plains of India, equally relates
 the existence of a continent and a people to which it gives the
 name of Atlantis and Atlantides, and which it locates in the Atlantic
 in the northern portion of the Tropics."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Apart from this fact, the supposition of an ancient continent
 in those latitudes, the vestiges of which may be found in the
 volcanic islands and moun- 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 223 THE MAGICIANS OF ATLANTIS.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 tainous surface of the Azores, the Canaries and Cape de Verdes,
 is not devoid of geographical probability. The Greeks, who, moreover,
 never dared to pass beyond the pillars of Hercules, on account
 of their dread of the mysterious ocean, appeared too late in antiquity
 for the stories preserved by Plato to be anything else than an
 echo of the Indian legend. Moreover, when we cast a look on a
 planisphere, at the sight of the islands and islets strewn from
 the Malayan Archipelago to Polynesia, from the straits of Sunda
 to Easter Island, it is impossible, upon the hypothesis of continents
 preceding those which we inhabit, not to place there the most
 important of all.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "A religious belief, common to Malacca and Polynesia, that
 is to say, to the two opposite extremes of the Oceanic world,
 affirms 'that all these islands once formed two immense countries,
 inhabited by yellow men and black men, always at war; and that
 the gods, wearied with their quarrels, having charged Ocean to
 pacify them, the latter swallowed up the two continents, and,
 since, it has been impossible to make him give up his captives.
 Alone, the mountain-peaks and high plateaux escaped the flood,
 by the power of the gods, who perceived too late the mistake they
 had committed.'
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Whatever there may be in these traditions, and whatever
 may have been the place where a civilization more ancient than
 that of Rome, of Greece, of Egypt, and of India was developed,
 it is certain that this civilization did exist, and it is highly
 important to science to recover its traces, however feeble and
 fugitive they may be" (<i>pp</i>. 13-15)<i>.</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This last tradition corroborates the one given from the "Records
 of the Secret Doctrine." The war mentioned between the yellow
 and the black men, relates to a struggle between the "sons
 of God" and the "sons of giants," or the inhabitants
 and magicians of Atlantis.
 </p><p>
 The final conclusion of the author, who personally visited all
 the islands of Polynesia, and devoted years to the study of the
 religion, language, and traditions of nearly all the peoples,
 is as follows:
 </p><blockquote>
 "As to the Polynesian continent which disappeared at the
 time of the final geological cataclysms, its existence rests on
 such proofs that to be logical we can doubt no longer.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The three summits of this continent, the Sandwich Islands,
 New Zealand, Easter Island, are distant from each other from fifteen
 to eighteen hundred leagues, and the groups of intermediate islands,
 Viti, Samoa, Tonga, Foutouna, Ouvea, the Marquesas, Tahiti, Poumoutou,
 the Gambiers, are themselves distant from these extreme points
 from seven or eight hundred to one thousand leagues.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "All navigators agree in saying that the extreme and the
 central groups could never have communicated in view of their
 actual geographical position, and with the insufficient means
 they had at hand. It is physically impossible to cross such distances
 in a pirogue . . . without a compass, and travel months without
 provisions.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "On the other hand, the aborigines of the Sandwich Islands,
 of Viti, of New Zealand, of the central groups, of Samoa, Tahiti,
 etc., <i>had never known each other, had never heard of each other,
 </i>before the arrival of the Europeans. <i>And yet each of these
 people maintained that their island had at one time formed part
 of</i> <i>an</i> 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 224 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 <i>immense stretch of land which extended towards the West on
 the side of Asia. </i>And all, brought together, were found to
 speak the same language, to have the same usages, the same customs,
 the same religious belief. And all to the question, 'Where is
 the cradle of your race?' for sole response, <i>extended their
 hand toward the setting sun</i>"<i> (Ibid., p. </i>308).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Geographically, this description clashes slightly with the facts
 in the Secret Records; but it shows the existence of such traditions,
 and this is all one cares for. For, as there is no smoke without
 fire, so a tradition must be based on some approximate truth.
 </p><p>
 In its proper place we will show modern Science fully corroborating
 the above and the traditions of the <em>Secret Doctrine </em>with
 regard to the two lost continents. The Easter Island relics are,
 for instance, the most astounding and eloquent memorials of the
 primeval giants. They are as grand as they are mysterious; and
 one has but to examine the heads of the colossal statues, that
 have remained unbroken on that island, to recognise in them at
 a glance the features of the type and character attributed to
 the Fourth Race giants. They seem of one cast though different
 in features -- that of a <em>distinctly sensual type, </em>such
 as the Atlanteans (the Daityas and "Atalantians") are
 represented to have in the esoteric Hindu books. Compare these
 with the faces of some other colossal statues in Central Asia
 -- those near Bamian for instance -- the <em>portrait-statues,
 </em>tradition tells us, of Buddhas belonging to <em>previous
 Manvantaras</em>;<em> </em>of those Buddhas and heroes who are
 mentioned in the Buddhist and Hindu works, as men of fabulous
 size,* the good and holy brothers of their wicked co-uterine brothers
 generally, as Ravana, the giant King of Lanka was the brother
 of Kumbhakarna; all descendants of the gods through the Rishis,
 and thus, like "Titan and his enormous brood," all "heaven's
 first born." These "Buddhas," though often spoilt
 by the symbolical representation of the great pendent ears, show
 a suggestive difference, perceived at a glance, between the expression
 of their faces and that of the Easter Isle statues. They may be
 of one race -- but the former are "Sons of Gods"; the
 latter the brood of mighty sorcerers. All these are re-incarnations,
 however, and apart from unavoidable exaggerations in popular fancy
 and tradition, they are <em>historical characters.** </em>When
 did they live? How long ago lived the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * An approach to the statues at Bamian -- also a Buddha 200 feet
 high -- is found near a Jain settlement in Southern India, and
 appears to be the only one that remains at present.
 </p><p>
 ** Even Wilson admits that Rama and Ravana were personages founded
 on historical facts: --"The traditions of Southern India
 uniformly ascribing its civilization and the settlement of civilized
 Hindus (the Fifth Race) to the conquest of Lanka by Rama"
 (<em>Vishnu Purana, </em>iii., <em>p.</em> 318) -- the victory
 of the "Sons of God" over the Atlantean sorcerers, says
 the <em>true </em>tradition. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 225 COCK AND BULL HYPOTHESES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 two races, the Third and Fourth, and how long after did the various
 tribes of the Fifth begin their strife, the wars between Good
 and Evil? We are assured by the Orientalists that chronology is
 both hopelessly mixed and absurdly exaggerated in the Puranas
 and other Hindu Scriptures. We feel quite prepared to agree with
 the accusation. Yet, if Aryan writers did allow their chronological
 pendulum to swing too far one way occasionally, beyond the legitimate
 limit of fact; nevertheless, when the distance of that deviation
 is compared with the distance of the Orientalists' deviation in
 the opposite direction, moderation will be found on the Brahminical
 side. It is the Pundit who will in the long run be found more
 truthful and nearer to fact than the Sanskritist. Surely, it is
 not because the curtailing of the latter -- even when proven to
 have been resorted to in order to fit a personal hobby -- is regarded
 by Western public opinion as "a <em>cautious </em>acceptance
 of facts," whereas the Pundit is brutally treated in print
 <em>as a liar, </em>that everyone has to see this in the same
 light. An impartial observer may judge it otherwise. He may either
 proclaim both unscrupulous historians, or justify both, each on
 his respective ground, and say: Hindu Aryans wrote for their Initiates,
 who read truth between the lines, not for the masses. If they
 did mix up events and confuse Ages <em>intentionally, </em>it
 was not in view of deceiving any one, but to preserve their knowledge
 from the prying eye of the foreigner. Otherwise, to him who <em>can
 count the generations from the Manus, and the series of incarnations
 specified in the cases of some heroes,* </em>the meaning and chronological
 order are very clear in the Puranas. As for the Western Orientalist,
 he must be excused, on account of his undeniable ignorance of
 the methods used by archaic Esotericism.
 </p><p>
 But such existing prejudices will have to give way and disappear
 very soon before the light of new discoveries. Already Dr. Weber's
 and Mr. Max Muller's favourite theories -- namely, that writing
 was not known in India, even in the days of Panini (!); that the
 Hindus had all their arts and sciences -- even to the Zodiac and
 their architecture (Ferguson) -- from the Macedonian Greeks; these
 and other such cock-and-bull hypotheses, are threatened with ruin.
 It is the ghost of old Chaldea that comes to the rescue of truth.
 In his third Hibbert
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Thus we are shown one hero, to give an instance, first born
 as the "unrighteous but valiant monarch" (Purusha) of
 the Daityas, Hiranyakasipu, slain by the Avatar <em>Nara-Sinha
 </em>(Man-lion). Then he was born as Ravana, the giant king of
 Lanka, and killed by Rama; after which he is reborn as Sisupala,
 the son of Rajarishi (King Rishi) Damaghosha, when he is again
 killed by Krishna, the last incarnation of Vishnu. This parallel
 evolution of Vishnu (spirit) with a Daitya, as men, may seem meaningless,
 yet it gives us the key not only to the respective dates of Rama
 and Krishna but even to a certain psychological mystery.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 226 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 lecture (1887) Professor Sayce of Oxford, speaking of newly-discovered
 Assyrian and Babylonian cylinders, referred at length to Ea, the
 God of Wisdom, now identified with the Oannes, of Berosus, the
 half-man, half-fish, who taught the Babylonians culture <em>and
 the art of writing. </em>This Oannes, to whom, thanks only to
 the Biblical Deluge, an antiquity of hardly 1,500 <b>B.C</b>.
 had been hitherto allowed, is now spoken of in these terms: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "His city was Eridu, which stood 6,000 years ago on the shores
 of the Persian Gulf. The name means 'the good city,' a particularly
 holy spot, since it was the centre from which the earliest Chaldean
 civilization made its way to the north. As the culture-god was
 represented as coming from the sea, it was possible that the culture
 of which Eridu was the seat was of foreign importation. <i>We
 now know that there was intercourse at a very early period between
 Chaldea and the Sinaitic peninsula, as well as with India.</i>
 The statues discovered by the French at Tel-loh (dating from at
 latest <b>B.C</b>. 4,000) were made of the extremely hard stone
 known as diorite, and the inscriptions on them stated the diorite
 to have been brought from Mazan -- <i>i.e</i>., the Sinaitic peninsula,
 which was then ruled by the Pharaohs. The statues are known to
 resemble in general style the diorite statue, Kephren, the builder
 of the second Pyramid, while, according to Mr. Petrie, the unit
 of measurement marked on the plan of the city, which one of the
 Tel-loh figures holds on his lap, is the same as that employed
 by the Pyramid builders. <i>Teak wood has been found at Mugheir,
 or Ur of the Chaldees, although that wood is an Indian special
 product; add to this that an ancient Babylonian list of clothing
 mentions sindhu, or 'muslins,' explained as 'vegetable cloth.</i>'
 "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Muslin, best known now as <em>Dacca </em>muslin, known in Chaldea
 as Hindu (Sindhu), and <em>teak </em>wood used 4,000 years <b>B.C</b>.;
 and yet the Hindus, to whom Chaldea owes its civilization (as
 well proven by Colonel vans Kennedy), were <em>ignorant of the
 art of writing </em>before the Greeks taught them their alphabet
 -- if we have to believe Orientalists!
 </p><p>
 ------- </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-13.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>