<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 277 THE GIANTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <strong>A</strong>RE <strong>G</strong>IANTS A <strong>F</strong>ICTION?
 </p><p>
 Here, again, we come into collision with Science. The latter denies,
 so far, that man has ever been much larger than the average of
 the tall and powerful men one meets with occasionally now. Dr.
 Henry Gregor denounces such traditions as resting upon ill-digested
 facts. Instances of mistaken judgments are brought forward. Thus,
 in 1613, in a locality called from time immemorial the "Field
 of Giants" in the Lower Dauphine (France, four miles from
 St. Romans) enormous bones were found deeply buried in the sandy
 soil. They were attributed to human remains, and even to Teutobochus,
 the Teuton chief slain by Marius. But Cuvier's later research
 proved them to be the fossil remains of the <em>Dinotherium giganteum
 </em>of the family of tapirs, 18 feet long. Ancient buildings
 are pointed to as an evidence that our earliest ancestors were
 not much larger than we are, the entrance doors being of no larger
 size then than they are now. The tallest man of antiquity <em>known
 to us </em>was the Roman Emperor Maximus, we are told, whose height
 was only seven and a half feet. Nevertheless, in our modern day
 we see every year men taller than this. The Hungarian who exhibited
 himself in the London Pavilion was nearly 9 feet high. In America
 a giant was shown 9 1/2 feet tall; the Montenegrin Danilo was
 8 feet 7 inches. In Russia and Germany one often sees men in the
 lower classes above 7 feet. And as the ape-theorists are told
 by Mr. Darwin that the species of animals which result from cross
 breeding "always betray <em>a tendency to revert to the</em>
 <em>original type,</em>"<em> </em>they ought to apply the
 same law to men. Had there been no giants as a rule in ancient
 days, there would be none now.
 </p><p>
 All this applies only to the historic period. And if the skeletons
 of the prehistoric ages have failed so far (which is positively
 denied) to prove undeniably in the opinion of science the claim
 here advanced, it is but a question of time. Moreover, as already
 stated, human stature is little changed since the last racial
 cycle. The Giants of old are all buried under the Oceans, and
 hundreds of thousands of years of constant friction by water would
 reduce to dust and pulverize a brazen, far more a human skeleton.
 But whence the testimony of well-known classical writers, of philosophers
 and men who, otherwise, never had the reputation for lying? Let
 us bear in mind, furthermore, that before the year 1847, when
 Boucher de Perthes forced it upon the attention of Science, almost
 nothing was known of fossil man, for archaeology complacently
 ignored his existence. Of Giants who were "in the earth in
 those days" of old, the Bible alone had spoken to the wise
 men of the West, the Zodiac being the solitary witness called
 upon to corroborate the statement in the persons of Atlas or Orion,
 whose mighty shoulders are said to support the world.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 278 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Nevertheless, even the "Giants" have not been left without
 their witnesses, and one may as well examine both sides of the
 question. The three Sciences -- Geological, Sidereal and Scriptural
 (the latter in its Universal character) -- may furnish us with
 the needed proofs. To begin with geology; it has already confessed
 that the older the excavated skeletons, the larger, taller and
 the more powerful their structure. This is already a certain proof
 in hand. "All those bones" writes Frederic de Rougemont
 -- who, though believing too piously in Noah's ark and the Bible,
 is none the less a Scientific witness -- "all those skeletons
 found in the Departments of the Gard, in Austria, Liege, etc.,
 etc. . . those skulls which remind all of the negro type. . .
 and which by reason of that type might be mistaken for animals,
 have all belonged to men <em>of very high stature</em>"<em>
 . </em>. <em>.</em> ("<em>Histoire de la Terre,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>154) The same is repeated by Lartet, an authority, who
 attributes a <em>tall stature </em>to those who were submerged
 in the deluge (not necessarily "Noah's") and a smaller
 stature to the races which lived subsequently.
 </p><p>
 As for the evidence furnished by ancient writers, we need not
 stop at that of Tertullian, who assures us that in his day a number
 of giants were found at Carthage -- for, before his testimony
 can be accepted, his own identity* and actual existence would
 have to be proven. But we may turn to the scientific journals
 of 1858, which spoke of <em>a sarcophagus of giants </em>found
 that year on the site of that same city. As to the ancient pagan
 writers -- we have the evidence of Philostratus, who speaks of
 a giant skeleton twenty-two cubits long, as well as of another
 of twelve cubits, seen by himself at Sigeus. This skeleton may
 perhaps not have belonged, as believed by Protesilaus, to the
 giant killed by Apollo at the siege of Troy; nevertheless, it
 was that of a giant, as well as that other one discovered by Messecrates
 of Stire, at Lemnos -- "horrible to behold," according
 to Philostratus (<em>Heroica, p. </em>35)<em>. </em>Is it possible
 that prejudice would carry Science so far as to class <em>all
 </em>these men as either fools or <em>liars?</em> 
 </p><p>
 Pliny speaks of a giant in whom he thought he recognised Orion,
 the son of Ephialtes (<em>Nat. Hist., vol. VII, ch. xvi.</em>)<em>.
 </em>Plutarch declares that Sertorius saw the tomb of Antaeus,
 the giant; and Pausanias vouches for the actual existence of the
 tombs of Asterius and of Geryon, or Hillus, son of Hercules --
 all giants, Titans and mighty men. Finally the Abbe Pegues (<em>cited
 in de Mirville</em>'<em>s Pneumatologie</em>)<em> </em>affirms
 in his curious work on "<em>The Volcanoes of Greece</em>"<em>
 </em>that "in the neighbourhood of the volcanoes of the isle
 of Thera, giants with enormous skulls were found laid out under
 colossal stones, the erection of which must have necessi-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * There are critics who, finding no evidence about the existence
 of Tertullian save in the writings of Eusebius "the veracious,"
 are inclined to doubt it.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 279 CHRISTENDOM IS IDOLATROUS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 tated everywhere the use of titanic powers, and which tradition
 associates in all countries with the ideas about giants, volcanoes
 and magic." (<em>Page </em>48.)
 </p><p>
 In the same work above cited of the Abbe Pegues, the author wonders
 why in Bible and tradition the <em>Gibborim, </em>(Giants, the
 mighty ones) the <em>Rephaim, </em>or the spectres (<em>Phantoms</em>),
 the<em> Nephilim, </em>or the fallen ones <em>-- </em>(<em>irruentes</em>)<em>
 -- </em>are shown "as if identical, though they are all <em>men</em>,
 since the Bible calls them the primitive and the mighty ones"
 -- e.g., Nimrod. The "Doctrine" explains the secret.
 These names, which belong by right only to the four preceding
 races and the earliest beginning of the Fifth, allude very clearly
 to the first two <em>Phantom</em> (astral) races; to the <em>fallen
 one -- </em>the Third; and to the race of the Atlantean Giants
 -- the Fourth, after which "men began to decrease in stature."
 </p><p>
 Bossuet (<em>Elevations p. </em>56) sees the cause of subsequent
 universal idolatry in the "original sin." "Ye shall
 be as gods," says the serpent of <em>Genesis </em>to Eve,
 thus laying the first germ of the worship of <em>false</em> <em>divinities.
 </em>Hence, he thinks, came idolatry, or the cult and adoration
 of <em>images, </em>of anthropomorphized or human figures. But,
 if it is the latter that idolatry is made to rest upon, then the
 two Churches, the Greek and the Latin especially, are as idolatrous
 and pagan as any other religion.* It is only in the Fourth Race
 that men, who had lost all right to be considered divine, resorted
 to body worship, in other words to phallicism. Till then, they
 had been truly gods, as pure and as divine as their progenitors,
 and the expression of the allegorical serpent does not, as sufficiently
 shown in the preceding pages, refer at all to the physiological
 fall of men, but to their acquiring the knowledge of good and
 evil, which knowledge comes to them <em>prior</em> to their fall.
 It must not be forgotten that it is only after his forced expulsion
 from Eden that "Adam knew Eve his wife" (<em>Genesis
 iv.</em>)<em>. </em>It is not, however, by the dead-letter of
 the Hebrew Bible that we shall check the tenets of the <em>Secret
 Doctrine</em>;<em> </em>but point out, rather, the great similarities
 between the two in their esoteric meaning.
 </p><p>
 It is only after his defection from the Neo-Platonists, that Clement
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * And that, notwithstanding the formal prohibition at the great
 Church Council of Elyrus in <strong>A.D. </strong>303, when it
 was declared that "the form of God, which is immaterial and
 invisible, shall not be limited by figure or shape." In 692,
 the council of Constantinople had similarly prohibited "to
 paint or represent Jesus <em>as a lamb</em>," as also "to
 bow the knee in praying, as it is the act of idolatry." But
 the council of Nicaea (787) brought this idolatry back, while
 that of Rome (883) excommunicated John, the Patriarch of Constantinople,
 for his showing himself a declared enemy of image worship.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 280 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of Alexandria began to translate <em>gigantes </em>by<em> serpentes,
 </em>explaining that "Serpents and Giants signify <em>Demons.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Genesis, chapter v.</em>)<em>*</em> 
 </p><p>
 We may be told that, before we draw parallels between our tenets
 and those of the Bible, we have to show better evidence of the
 existence of the giants of the Fourth Race than the reference
 to them found in Genesis. We answer, that the proofs we give are
 more satisfactory, at any rate they belong to a more literary
 and scientific evidence, than those of Noah's Deluge will ever
 be. Even the historical works of China are full of such reminiscences
 about the Fourth Race. In <em>Shoo-King </em>(4th part, chap.
 <strong>XXVII</strong>, p. 291), anyone can read in the French
 translation, "When the Mao-tse" ("that antediluvian
 and perverted race," explains the Annotator, "which
 had retired in the days of old to the rocky caves, and the descendants
 of whom are said to be still found in the neighbourhood of Canton"),**
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Treating of the Chinese Dragon and the literature of China,
 Mr. Ch. Gould writes in his "<em>Mythical Monsters</em>"<em>
 </em>on p. 212: -- "Its mythologies, histories, religions,
 popular stories and proverbs, all teem with references to a mysterious
 being <em>who has a physical</em> <em>nature and spiritual attributes.
 </em>Gifted with an accepted form, which he has the supernatural
 power of casting off for the assumption of others, he has the
 power of influencing the weather, producing droughts or fertilizing
 rains at pleasure, of raising tempests and allaying them. Volumes
 could be compiled from the scattered legends which everywhere
 abound relating to this subject. . . . "
 </p><p>
 This "mysterious being" is the <em>mythical </em>Dragon,
 <em>i.e.</em>, the symbol of the <em>historical,</em> actual Adept,
 the master and professor of occult sciences of old. It is stated
 already elsewhere, that the great "magicians" of the
 Fourth and Fifth Races were generally called the "Serpents"
 and the "Dragons" after their progenitors. All these
 belonged to the hierarchy of the so-called "Fiery Dragons
 of Wisdom," the Dhyan Chohans, answering to the Agnishwatta
 Pitris, the Maruts and Rudras generally, as the issue of Rudra
 their father, identified with the god of fire. More is said in
 the text. Now Clement, an initiated Neo-Platonist, knew, of course,
 the origin of the word "Dragon," and why the initiated
 Adepts were so-called, as he knew the secret of <em>Agathodaemon,</em>
 the Christ, the seven-vowelled Serpent of the Gnostics. He knew
 that the dogma of his new faith required the transformation of
 all the <em>rivals </em>of Jehovah, the angels supposed to have
 rebelled against that Elohim as the Titan-Prometheus rebelled
 against Zeus, the usurper of his father's kingdom; and that "Dragon"
 was the mystic appellation of the "Sons of Wisdom";
 from this knowledge came his definition, as cruel as it was arbitrary,
 "Serpents and Giants signify <em>Demons,</em>"<em> i.e.,
 </em>not "Spirits," but <em>Devils, </em>in Church parlance.
 </p><p>
 ** "What would you say to our affirmation that the Chinese
 -- I speak of the inland, the true Chinaman, not of the hybrid
 mixture between the Fourth and Fifth Races now occupying the throne,
 the aborigines who belong in their unallied nationality wholly
 to the highest and last branch of the Fourth Race -- reached their
 highest civilization when the Fifth had hardly appeared in Asia"
 (<em>Esoteric Buddhism, </em>p. 67). And this handful of the inland
 Chinese are all of a very high stature. Could the most ancient
 <strong>MSS.</strong> in the Lolo language (that of the aborigines
 of China) be got at and translated correctly, many a priceless
 piece of evidence would be found. But they are as rare as their
 language is unintelligible. So far, one or two European archaeologists
 only have been able to procure such priceless works.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 281 THE SEVEN VIRGIN-YOUTHS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "<em>according to our ancient documents, </em>had, owing
 to the beguilements of <em>Tchy-Yeoo, </em>troubled all the earth,
 it became full of brigands. . . . ." The Lord Chang-ty (a
 king of the <em>divine </em>dynasty) saw that his people had lost
 the last vestiges of virtue. Then he commanded Tehong and Lhy
 (two lower Dhyan Chohans) to cut away every communication between
 heaven and earth. Since then, there was no more <em>going up and</em>
 <em>down!</em>"<em>**</em> 
 </p><p>
 "Going up and down" means an untrammelled communication
 and intercourse between the two worlds. Not being in a position
 to give out a full and detailed history of the Third and Fourth
 Races, as many isolated facts concerning them as are permitted
 must be now collated together; especially those corroborated by
 direct as well as by inferential evidence found in ancient literature
 and history. As the "coats of skin" of men thickened,
 and they fell more and more into physical sin, the intercourse
 between physical and ethereal <em>divine</em> man was stopped.
 The veil of matter between the two planes became too dense for
 even the inner man to penetrate. The mysteries of Heaven and Earth,
 revealed to the Third Race by their celestial teachers in the
 days of their purity, became a great focus of light, the rays
 from which became necessarily weakened as they were diffused and
 shed upon an uncongenial, because too material soil. With the
 masses they degenerated into Sorcery, taking later on the shape
 of exoteric religions, of idolatry full of superstitions, and
 man-, or hero-worship. Alone a handful of primitive men -- in
 whom the spark of divine Wisdom burnt bright, and only strengthened
 in its intensity as it got dimmer and dimmer with every age in
 those who turned it to bad purposes -- remained the elect custodians
 of the Mysteries revealed to mankind by the divine Teachers. There
 were those among them, who remained in their <em>Kumaric</em>
 condition from the beginning; and tradition whispers, what the
 secret teachings affirm, namely, that these Elect were the germ
 of a Hierarchy <em>which never died since that period: -</em>-
 </p><p>
 "<em>The inner man of the first * </em>* <em>* only changes
 his body from time</em> <em>to time</em>;<em> he is ever the same,
 knowing neither rest nor Nirvana, spurning</em> <em>Devachan and
 remaining constantly on Earth for the salvation of</em> <em>mankind</em>.
 . . . . ." "<em>Out of the seven virgin-men </em>(Kumara**)
 <em>four sacrificed themselves for the sins of the world and the
 instruction of</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Remember the same statement in the Book of Enoch, as also the
 ladder seen by Jacob in his dream. The "two worlds"
 mean of course the "two <em>planes </em>of Consciousness
 and Being." A seer can commune with beings of a higher plane
 than the earth, without quitting his arm-chair.
 </p><p>
 ** <em>Vide supra</em> the <em>Commentary </em>on the Four Races
 -- and on the "Sons of Will and Yoga," the immaculate
 progeny of the Androgynous Third Race.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 282 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>the ignorant, to remain till the end of the present Manvantara.
 Though</em> <em>unseen, they are ever present. When people say
 of one of them, </em>"<em>He is</em> <em>dead</em>";<em>
 behold, he is alive and under another form. These are the Head,</em>
 <em>the Heart, the Soul, and the Seed of undying knowledge </em>(Gnyana).
 <em>Thou shalt never speak, O Lanoo, of these great ones </em>(Maha
 . . <em>.</em>)<em> before</em> <em>a multitude, mentioning them
 by their names. The wise alone will</em> <em>understand.</em>"<em>
 . . . </em>* (Catechism of the inner Schools.)
 </p><p>
 It is these sacred "Four" who have been allegorized
 and symbolized in the "<em>Linga Purana,</em>"<em> </em>which
 states that Vamadeva (Siva) as Kumara is reborn in each Kalpa
 (<em>Race </em>in this instance), as four youths -- four, white;
 four, red; four, yellow; and four, dark or brown. Let us remember
 that Siva is pre-eminently and chiefly an ascetic, the patron
 of all Yogis and Adepts, and the allegory will become quite comprehensible.
 It is the spirit of Divine Wisdom and chaste asceticism itself
 which incarnates in these Elect. It is only after <em>getting
 married </em>and being dragged by the gods from his terrible ascetic
 life, that Rudra becomes Siva, a god, and not one of a very virtuous
 or merciful type, in the Hindu Pantheon. Higher than the "Four"
 is only <strong>O</strong>NE on Earth as in Heavens -- that still
 more mysterious and solitary Being described in Book I.
 </p><p>
 We have now to examine the nature of the "Sons of the Flame"
 and of "Dark Wisdom," as well as the <em>pros</em> and
 <em>cons </em>of the Satanic assumption.
 </p><p>
 Such broken sentences as could be made out from the fragments
 on the tile, which George Smith calls "the Curse after the
 Fall" (see p. 81 of his "Chaldean Account of Genesis"),
 are of course allegorical; yet they corroborate that which is
 taught of the true nature of the <em>fall of the angels</em> in
 our Books. Thus, it is said in line 12 that the "Lord of
 the earth his name called out, the father Elu" (Elohim),
 and pronounced his curse, which "The God Hea heard, and his
 liver was angry, because <em>his </em>man (Angelic man) had corrupted
 his purity (14 <em>and </em>15)," for which Hea expresses
 the desire that "<em> </em>'<em>Wisdom and knowledge</em>'<em>
 </em>hostilely may they injure him (man)."
 </p><p>
 The latter sentence points to the direct connection of the Chaldean
 with the Genetic account. While Hea tries to bring to nought the
 wisdom and knowledge gained by man, through his newly-acquired
 intellectual and conscious capacity of creating in his turn (thus
 taking the monopoly of creation out of the hands of God (the Gods)),
 the Elohim do the same in the third chapter of <em>Genesis. </em>Therefore
 the Elohim sent him out of Eden.
 </p><p>
 But this was of no avail. For the spirit of divine Wisdom being
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In the Kabala the pronunciation of the four-lettered<em> ineffable
 </em>name is "a most secret arcanum" --- "a secret
 of secrets."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 283 THE SERPENT OF ETERNITY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 upon and <em>in </em>man -- verily the Serpent of Eternity and
 all Knowledge, that<em> Manasic </em>spirit, which made him learn
 the secret of <em>creation </em>on the Kriyasaktic, and of procreation
 on the earthly planes -- led him as naturally to discover his
 way to immortality, notwithstanding the jealousy of all the Gods.
 </p><p>
 The early Atlanto-Lemurians are charged with taking unto themselves
 (divine incarnations) wives of a lower race, namely, the race
 of the hitherto mindless men. Every ancient Scripture has the
 same, more or less disfigured legend. Primarily, the angelic <em>Fall</em>,
 which has transformed the "first-born" of God into the
 Asuras, or into the Ahriman and Typhon of the "pagans"
 (<em>i.e</em>., if the accounts given in the Book of Enoch,* and
 in Hermes, in Puranas and Bible are taken literally), when read
 esoterically means simply this: --
 </p><p>
 Sentences such as: "In his (Satan's) ambition he raises his
 hand against the Sanctuary of the God of Heaven" etc., ought
 to read: "Prompted by the law of eternal evolution and Karma,
 the angel incarnated on earth in man; and as his Wisdom and Knowledge
 are still divine, although his body is earthly, he is (allegorically)
 accused of divulging the mysteries of Heaven." He combines
 and uses the two for purposes of human, instead of super-human,
 procreation. Henceforth, "man will <em>beget, </em>not <em>create.</em>"<em>**
 </em>But as, by so doing, he has to use
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Returning once more to the most important subject in the archaic
 Cosmogony, it may be said that even in the Norse legends, in the
 Sacred Scrolls of the goddess Saga, we find Loki, the brother
 by blood of Odin (as Typhon, Ahriman, and others are brothers
 of Osiris and Ormazd), becoming evil only later, when he has mixed
 too long with humanity. Like all other fire or light gods -- fire
 burning and destroying as well as warming and giving life -- he
 ended by being accepted in the destructive sense of "fire."
 The name <em>Loki, </em>we learn ("<em>Asgard and the Gods,</em>"<em>
 p.</em> 250)<em>, </em>has been derived from the old word "liechan,"
 to enlighten. It has, therefore, the same origin as the Latin
 "<em>lux</em>, light." Hence <em>Loki </em>is identical
 with Lucifer (light-bringer). This title, given to the Prince
 of Darkness, is very suggestive and is a <em>vindication </em>in
 itself against theological slander. But <em>Loki </em>is still
 more closely related to Prometheus, as he is shown chained to
 a sharp rock, while Lucifer, identified with Satan, was chained
 down in hell; a circumstance, however, which prevented neither
 of them from acting in all freedom on Earth, if we accept the
 theological paradox in its fulness. <em>Loki </em>is a beneficent,
 generous and powerful god in the beginning of times, and the principle
 of good, not of evil, in early Scandinavian theogony.
 </p><p>
 ** The Greek mythos just alluded to a few pages back, namely the
 mutilation of <em>Uranos </em>by his son <em>Kronos </em>in the
 Greek theogony, is an allusion to this theft by the Son of the
 Earth and Heavens of the <em>divine creative fire.</em> If<em>
 Uranos, </em>the personification of the celestial Powers, has
 to stop creating (he is made impotent by <em>Kronos, </em>the
 god <em>in time</em>)<em> </em>so, in the Egyptian Cosmogony it
 is Thot, the god of Wisdom, who regulates this fight between Horus
 and Set, the latter being served by the former as Uranos is by
 Kronos (<em>see </em>"<em>Book of the Dead</em>"<em>
 ch. XVII. V. </em>26). In the Babylonian account it is the god
 Zu, who strips "the father of the gods" of <em>umsimi
 -- </em>the ideal creative organ not the <em>crown </em>(!) as
 G. Smith thought (see pp. 115 and 116 Chaldean Account). For,
 in the fragment K. 3454 (British Museum) it is said very clearly,
 that Zu having stripped the "venerable [[Footnote continued
 on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 284 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 his weak body as the means of procreation, that body will pay
 the penalty for this wisdom, carried from heaven down to the earth;
 hence the corruption of physical purity will become a temporary
 curse.
 </p><p>
 The mediaeval Kabalists knew this well, since one of them did
 not fear to write: "The Kabala was first taught by God himself
 to a select Company of Angels who formed a theosophic school in
 Paradise. After the <strong>F</strong>ALL the Angels most <em>graciously
 communicated this heavenly doctrine to the disobedient child of
 Earth, </em>to furnish the protoplasts with the means of returning
 to their pristine nobility and felicity" (<em>Quoted by</em>
 <em>Christian Ginsburg from the Kabala</em>)<em>. </em>This shows
 how the event -- of the Sons of God, marrying and imparting the
 divine Secrets of Heaven to the daughters of men -- allegorically
 told by Enoch and in the sixth chapter of Genesis was interpreted
 by the Christian Kabalists. The whole of this period may be regarded
 as the <em>pre-human </em>period, that of divine man, or as <em>plastic
 </em>Protestant theology now has it -- the <em>pre</em>-adamite
 period. But even Genesis begins its<em> real </em>history (<em>chap.
 </em>vi.) by the <em>giants</em> of "those days" and
 the "Sons of god" marrying and teaching their wives
 -- the daughters of man.
 </p><p>
 This period is the one described in the Puranas; and relating
 as it does to days lost in archaic ages, hence pre-historic, how
 can any anthropologist feel certain whether the mankind of that
 period was or was not as he knows it now? The whole <em>personnel
 </em>of the Brahmanas and Puranas -- the Rishis, Prajapatis, Manus,
 their wives and progeny -- belong to that pre-human period. All
 these are the <em>Seed </em>of Humanity, so to speak. It is around
 these "Sons of God," the "Mind born" astral
 children of Brahma, that our physical frames have grown and developed
 to what they are now. For, the Puranic histories of all those
 men are those of our Monads, in their various and numberless incarnations
 on this and other spheres, events perceived by the "Siva
 eye" of the ancient Seers, (the "third eye" of
 our Stanzas) and described allegorically. Later on, they were
 disfigured for Sectarian purposes; mutilated, but still left with
 a considerable ground-work of truth in them. Nor is the philosophy
 less profound in such allegories for being so thickly veiled by
 the overgrowth of fancy.
 </p><p>
 But with the Fourth Race we reach the purely human period. Those
 who were hitherto semi-divine Beings, self-imprisoned in bodies
 which were human only in appearance, became physiologically changed
 and took unto themselves wives who were entirely human and fair
 to look
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] of Heaven" of his
 <em>desire, </em>he carried away the <em>umsimi </em>of the gods,
 and burnt thereby the <em>teroti </em>(the power) of all the other
 gods, thus "governing the <em>seed </em>of all the angels"
 (15). As the <em>umsimi </em>was <em>on the seat </em>of Bel,
 it could hardly be the "crown." A fourth version is
 in the Bible. Ham is the Chaldean Zu, and both are cursed for
 the same allegorically described crime.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 285 THE TIBETAN LILITH.</h6>
 
 <p>
 at, but in whom <em>lower, more material, </em>though sidereal,
 beings had incarnated. These beings in female forms (Lilith is
 the prototype of these in the Jewish traditions) are called in
 the esoteric accounts "Khado" (Dakini, in Sanskrit).
 Allegorical legends call the chief of these Liliths, <em>Sangye
 Khado, </em>(Buddha Dakini, in Sanskrit); all are credited with
 the art of "walking in the air," and the greatest <em>kindness</em>
 <em>to mortals</em>;<em> </em>but <em>no mind -- </em>only animal
 instinct.*
 </p><p>
 (<em>c</em>) This is the beginning of a worship which, ages later,
 was doomed to degenerate into phallicism and sexual worship. It
 began by the worship of the human body -- that "miracle of
 miracles," as an English author calls it -- and ended by
 that of its respective sexes. The worshippers were giants in stature;
 but they were giants in knowledge and learning, though it came
 to them more easily than it does to the men of our modern times.
 Their Science was innate in them. The Lemuro-Atlantean had no
 need of discovering and fixing in his memory that which his informing
 <strong>P</strong>RINCIPLE <em>knew </em>at the moment of its
 incarnation. Time alone, and the ever-growing obtuseness of the
 matter in which the <em>Principles </em>had clothed themselves,
 could, the one, weaken the memory of their pre-natal knowledge,
 the other, blunt and even extinguish every spark of the spiritual
 and divine in them. Therefore had they, from the first, fallen
 victims to their animal natures and bred "monsters"
 -- <em>i.e.</em>, men of distinct varieties from themselves.
 </p><p>
 Speaking of the Giants, Creuzer describes them well in saying
 that:--
 </p><blockquote>
 "Those children of Heaven and Earth were endowed at their
 birth by the <i>Sovereign Powers, </i>the authors of their being,
 with extraordinary faculties both moral and physical. They <i>commanded
 the Elements, knew the secrets of</i> <i>heaven and the earth,
 of the sea and the whole world, and read futurity in</i> the stars.
 . . . It seems, indeed, as though one has to deal, when reading
 of them, <i>not with men as we are </i>but with Spirits of the
 Elements sprung from the bosom of Nature and having full sway
 over her. . . . All these beings <i>are</i> <i>marked with a character
 </i>of MAGIC and SORCERY. . . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 And so they were, those (now) legendary heroes of the pre-historic,
 still, once really existing races. Creuzer was wise in his generation,
 for he did not charge with deliberate deceit, or dullness and
 superstition, an endless series of recognized philosophers, who
 mention these races and assert that, even in their own time, they
 saw their fossils. There were sceptics in days of old -- no fewer
 and as great as they are now. But even a Lucian, a Democritus
 and an Epicurus yielded to the evidence of <em>facts </em>and
 showed the discriminative capacity of really
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * These are the beings whose legendary existence has served as
 a ground-work upon which to build the rabbinical Lilith, and what
 the believers in the Bible would term the antediluvian women,
 and the Kabalists the pre-Adamite races. They are no fiction --
 this is certain, however fantastic the exuberance of later growth.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 286 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 great intellects, which can distinguish fiction from fact, and
 truth from exaggeration and fraud. Ancient writers were no more
 fools than our modern wise men are; for, as well remarked by the
 author of some "<em>Notes</em> <em>on Aristotle</em>'<em>s
 Psychology in Relation to Modern Thought</em>" (<em>in Mind</em>)<em>:</em>--
 </p><blockquote>
 "The common division of history into ancient and modern is
 . . . . misleading. The Greeks in the 4th century, <strong>B.C</strong>.
 were in many respects moderns especially, we may add, in their
 scepticism. They were not very likely to accept <i>fables </i>so
 easily . . . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Yet the "Lemurians" and the Atlanteans, "those
 children of Heaven and Earth," were indeed marked with a
 character of SORCERY; for the Esoteric doctrine charges them precisely
 with that, which, if believed, would put an end to the difficulties
 of science with regard to the origin of man, or rather, his anatomical
 similarities to the <em>Anthropoid Ape. </em>It accuses them of
 having committed the (<em>to us</em>)<em> </em>abominable crime
 of breeding with so-called "animals," and thus producing
 a truly pithecoid species, now extinct. Of course, as in the question
 of spontaneous generation -- in which Esoteric Science believes,
 and which it teaches -- the possibility of such a cross-breed
 between man and an animal of any kind will be denied. But apart
 from the consideration that in those early days, as already remarked,
 neither the human Atlantean giants, nor yet the "animals,"
 were the physiologically perfect men and mammalians that are now
 known to us, the modern notions upon this subject -- those of
 the physiologists included -- are too uncertain and fluctuating
 to permit them an absolute denial <em>a priori </em>of such a
 fact.
 </p><p>
 A careful perusal of the Commentaries would make one think that
 the Being that the new "<em>incarnate</em>"<em> </em>bred
 with, was called an "animal," not because he was no
 human being, but rather because he was so dissimilar physically
 and mentally to the more perfect races, which had developed physiologically
 at an earlier period. Remember Stanza <strong>VII.</strong> and
 what is said in its first verse (24th): -- that when the "Sons
 of Wisdom" came to incarnate the first time, some of them
 incarnated fully, others projected into the forms only <em>a spark,
 </em>while some of the shadows were left over from being <em>filled
 </em>and perfected, till the Fourth Race. Those races, then, which
 "remained destitute of knowledge," or those again which
 were left "mindless," remained as they were, even after
 the natural separation of the sexes. It is these who committed
 the first cross-breeding, so to speak, and bred monsters; and
 it is from the descendants of these that the Atlanteans chose
 their wives. Adam and Eve were supposed, with Cain and Abel, to
 be the only <em>human </em>family on Earth. Yet we see Cain going
 to the land of Nod and taking there a wife. Evidently one race
 only was supposed perfect enough to be called human; and, even
 in our own day, while the Singhalese </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 287 THE RACES OF MEN NOT ALL HUMAN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 regard the Veddhas of their jungles as <em>speaking animals </em>and
 no more, some British people believe firmly, in their arrogance,
 that every other human family -- especially the dark Indians --
 is an <em>inferior </em>race. Moreover there are naturalists who
 have sincerely considered the problem whether some savage tribes
 -- like the Bushmen for instance -- can be regarded as <em>men
 </em>at all. The Commentary says, in describing that species (or
 race) of animals "fair to look at" as a biped: -- "<em>Having</em>
 <em>human shape, but having the lower extremities, from the waist
 down,</em> <em>covered with hair.</em>"<em> </em>Hence the
 race of the <em>satyrs, </em>perhaps.
 </p><p>
 If men existed two million years ago, they must have been -- just
 as the animals were -- quite different physically and anatomically
 from what they have become; and they were nearer then to the type
 of pure mammalian animal than they are now. Anyhow, we learn that
 the animal world breeds strictly <em>inter se, i.e., </em>in accordance
 with genus and species -- only since the appearance <em>on this
 earth </em>of the Atlantean race. As demonstrated by the author
 of that able work, "<em>Modern Science and</em> <em>Modern
 Thought,</em>"<em> </em>this idea of the refusal to breed
 with another species, or that sterility is the only result of
 such breeding, "appears to be a <em>prima facie </em>deduction
 rather than an absolute law" even now. He shows that "different
 species, do, in fact, often breed together, as may be seen in
 the familiar instance of the horse and ass. It is true that in
 this case the mule is sterile. . . . but this rule is not universal,
 and recently one new hybrid race, that of the leporine, or hare-rabbit,
 has been created which is perfectly fertile." The progeny
 of wolf and dog is also instanced, as that of several other domestic
 animals (p. 101); "like foxes and dogs again, and the modern
 Swiss cattle shown by Rutimeyer as descended from three distinct
 species of fossil-oxen, the <em>Bos primigenius,</em> <em>Bos
 longifrons and Bos frontosus.</em>"<em> Yet some of those
 species, as the ape</em> <em>family, which so clearly resembles
 man in physical structure, </em>contain, we are told, "numerous
 branches, which graduate into one another, but the extremes of
 which differ more widely than man does from the highest of the
 ape series" -- the gorilla and chimpanzee, for instance (see
 <em>Addenda</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Thus Mr. Darwin's remark -- or shall we say the remark of Linnaeus?
 <em>-- natura non facit saltum, </em>is not only corroborated
 by Esoteric Science but would -- were there any chance of the
 real doctrine being accepted by any others than its direct votaries
 -- reconcile in more than one way, if not entirely, the modern
 Evolution theory with facts, as also with the absolute failure
 of the Anthropologists to meet with the "missing link"
 in our Fourth Round geological formations.
 </p><p>
 We will show elsewhere that, however unconsciously to itself,
 modern Science pleads our case upon its own admissions, and that
 de Quatrefages is perfectly right, when he suggests in his last
 work, that it is far more likely that the anthropoid ape should
 be discovered to be</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 288 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>the descendant of man, </em>than that these two types should
 have a common, fantastic and nowhere-to-be-found ancestor. Thus
 the wisdom of the compilers of the old Stanzas is vindicated by
 at least one eminent man of Science, and the Occultist prefers
 to believe as he ever did that --
 </p><p>
 "<em>Man was the first and highest </em>(mammalian) <em>animal
 that appeared in</em> <em>this </em>(Fourth Round) <em>creation.
 Then came still huger animals</em>;<em> and last</em> <em>of all
 the dumb man who walks on all fours.</em>"<em> </em>For,<em>
 "the Rakshasas </em>(giant-demons) <em>and Daityas </em>(<em>Titans</em>)<em>
 of the </em>"<em>White Dwipa</em>"<em> </em>(continent)
 <em>spoiled his </em>(the dumb man's) <em>Sires.</em>" (Commentary.)
 </p><p>
 Furthermore, as we see, there are anthropologists who have traced
 man back to an epoch which goes far to break down the apparent
 barrier that exists between the chronologies of modern science
 and the Archaic Doctrine. It is true that English scientists generally
 have declined to commit themselves to the sanction of the hypothesis
 of even a Tertiary Man. They, each and all, measure the antiquity
 of Homo primigenius by their own lights and prejudices. Huxley,
 indeed, ventures to speculate on a possible Pliocene or Miocene
 Man. Prof. Seeman and Mr. Grant Allen have relegated his advent
 to the Eocene, but, speaking generally, English scientists consider
 that we cannot safely go beyond the quaternary. Unfortunately,
 the facts do not accommodate the too cautious reserve of these
 latter. The French school of anthropology, basing their views
 on the discoveries of l'Abbe Bourgeois, Capellini, and others,
 has accepted, almost without exception, the doctrine that the
 traces of our ancestors are certainly to be found in the Miocene,
 while M. de Quatrefages now inclines to postulate a Secondary-Age
 Man. Further on we shall compare such estimates with the figures
 given in the Brahminical exoteric books which approximate to the
 esoteric teaching.
 </p><p>
 (<em>d</em>)<em> </em>. . . . <em>Then, </em>"<em>the third
 eye acted no longer,</em>"<em> </em>says the Stanza, because
 MAN had sunk too deep into the mire of matter.
 </p><p>
 What is the meaning of this strange and weird statement in Verse
 42, concerning the "third eye of the Third Race which had
 died and acted no longer"?
 </p><p>
 A few more occult teachings must now be given with reference to
 this point as well as some others. The history of the Third and
 Fourth Races must be amplified, in order that it may throw some
 more light on the development of our present humanity; and show
 how the faculties, called into activity by occult training, restore
 man to the position he previously occupied in reference to spiritual
 perception and consciousness. But the phenomenon of the third
 Eye has to be first explained.
 </p><p>
 ------- </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-17.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>