<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 690 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h3>ยง IV.<br>
 DURATION OF THE GEOLOGICAL PERIODS, RACE <br>
 CYCLES, AND THE ANTIQUITY OF MAN.</h3>
 
 <p>
 <b>M</b>ILLIONS of years have dropped into Lethe, leaving no more
 recollection in the memory of the profane than the few millenniums
 of the orthodox Western chronology as to the origin of Man and
 the history of the primeval races.
 </p><p>
 All depends on the proofs found for the antiquity of the Human
 Race. If the still-debated man of the Pliocene or even the Miocene
 period was the <em>Homo primigenius, </em>then science <em>may</em>
 be right (<em>argumenti causa</em>)<em> </em>in basing its present
 anthropology -- as to the date and mode of origin of "Homo
 sapiens" -- on the Darwinian theory.* But if the skeletons
 of man should, at any time, be discovered in the Eocene strata,
 but no fossil ape, thereby proving the existence of man prior
 to the anthropoid -- then Darwinians will have to exercise their
 ingenuity in another direction. And it is said in well-informed
 quarters that the <strong>XX</strong>th century will be yet in
 its earliest teens, when such undeniable proof of Man's priority
 will be forthcoming.
 </p><p>
 Even now evidence is brought forward that the dates for the foundations
 of cities, civilizations and various other historical events have
 been absurdly curtailed. This was done as a peace-offering to
 Biblical chronology. "No date," writes the well-known
 Palaeontologist, Ed. Lartet, "is to be found in Genesis,
 which assigns a time for the birth of primitive humanity";
 but chronologists have for fifteen centuries endeavoured to force
 the Bible facts into agreement with their systems. Thus, no less
 than one hundred and forty different opinions have been formed
 about the single date of "Creation"; "and between
 the extreme variations there is a discrepancy of 3,194 years,
 in the reckoning of the period between the beginning of the world
 and the birth of Christ.** Within the last few years, archaeologists
 have had to throw back by nearly 3,000 years also the beginnings
 of Babylonian civilization. On the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It may here be remarked that those Darwinians, who with Mr.
 Grant Allen, place our "hairy arboreal" ancestors so
 far back as the <em>Eocene Age, </em>are landed in rather an awkward
 dilemma. No fossil anthropoid ape -- much less the fabulous common
 ancestor assigned to Man and the Pithecoid -- appears in Eocene
 strata. The first presentment of an anthropoid ape is Miocene.
 </p><p>
 ** Ed. Lartet, "Nouvelles Recherches sur la co-existence
 de l'homme et des Grands Mammiferes Fossils de la derniere periode
 Geologique." Annales des Soc. Nat., t. <strong>XV</strong>.,
 p. 256.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 691 PROFESSOR SAYCE SKETCHES OUT CHRONOLOGY.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 foundation cylinder deposited by Nabonidus, the Babylonian king,
 conquered by Cyrus -- are found the records of the former, in
 which he speaks of his discovery of the foundation stone that
 belonged to the original temple built by Naram-Sin, son of Sargon,
 of Accadia, the conqueror of Babylonia, who, says Nabonidus, lived
 3,200 years before his own time."
 </p><p>
 We have shown in <em>Isis </em>that those who based history on
 the Jewish Chronology (a race which had none of its own and rejected
 the Western till the <strong>XII</strong>th century) would lose
 themselves, for the Jewish account could only be followed through
 Kabalistic computation, and with a key to it in the hand. . .
 We had characterised the late George Smith's chronology of the
 Chaldeans and Assyrians, made by him to fit in with that of Moses,
 as quite fantastic. And now, in this respect at least, later Assyriologists
 have corroborated our denial. For, whereas G. Smith makes Sargon
 I. (the prototype of Moses in his legend) reign in the city of
 Akkad about 1600 <strong>B.C</strong>. -- probably out of a latent
 respect for Moses, whom the Bible makes to flourish 1571 <strong>B.C</strong>.
 -- we now learn from the first of the six Hibbert lectures delivered
 by Professor A. H. Sayce, of Oxford, in 1887, that: "Old
 views of the early annals of Babylonia and its religions have
 been much modified by recent discovery. The first Semitic Empire,
 it is now agreed, was that of Sargon of Accad, who established
 a great library, patronized literature, and extended his conquests
 across the sea into Cyprus. It is now known that he reigned as
 early as <strong>B.C</strong>. 3750." "The Accadian
 monuments found by the French at Tel-loh must be even older, reaching
 back to about <strong>B.C</strong>. 4,000," in other words,
 to the fourth year of the World's creation agreeably with Bible
 chronology, and when Adam was in his swaddling clothes. Perchance,
 in a few years more, the 4,000 years may be further extended.
 The well-known Oxford lecturer remarked during his disquisitions
 upon "<em>The origin and Growth of Religion as illustrated
 by the Babylonian Religion</em>"<em> </em>that: "The
 difficulties of systematically tracing the origin and history
 of the Babylonian Religion were considerable. The sources of our
 knowledge of the subject were almost wholly monumental, very little
 help being obtainable from classical or Oriental writers. Indeed,
 it was an undeniable fact that the Babylonian priesthood intentionally
 swaddled up the study of the religious texts in coils of almost
 insuperable difficulty." That they have confused the dates,
 and especially the order of events "intentionally,"
 is undeniable, and for a very good reason: their writings and
 records were all esoteric. The Babylonian priests did no more
 than the Priests of other ancient nations. Their records were
 meant only for the Initiates and their disciples, and it is only
 the latter who were furnished with the keys to the true meaning.
 But Professor</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 692 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Sayce's remarks are promising. For he explains the difficulty
 by saying that as -- "the Nineveh library contained mostly
 copies of older Babylonian texts, and the copyists pitched upon
 such tablets only as were of special interest to the Assyrian
 conquerors, belonging to a comparatively late epoch, this added
 much to the greatest of all our difficulties -- namely, our being
 so often left in the dark as to the age of our documentary evidence,
 and the precise worth of our materials for history." Thus
 one has a right to infer that some still fresher discovery may
 lead to a new necessity for pushing the Babylonian dates so far
 beyond the year 4,000 <strong>B.C</strong>., as to make them <em>pre-Kosmic
 </em>in the judgment of every Bible worshipper.
 </p><p>
 How much more would paleontology have learned had not millions
 of works been destroyed! We talk of the Alexandrian literary lore,
 which has been thrice destroyed, namely, by Julius Caesar <strong>B.C</strong>.
 48, in <strong>A.D</strong>. 390, and lastly in the year 640,
 <strong>A.D</strong>., by the general of Kaliph Omar. What is
 this in comparison with the works and records destroyed in the
 primitive Atlantean Libraries, wherein records are said to have
 been traced on the tanned skins of gigantic antediluvian monsters?
 Or again the destruction of the countless Chinese books by command
 of the founder of the Imperial Tsin dynasty, Tsin Shi Hwang-ti,
 in 213 <strong>B.C</strong>.? Surely the brick-clay tablets of
 the Imperial Babylonian Library, and the priceless treasures of
 the Chinese collections could have never contained such information
 as one of the aforesaid "Atlantean" skins would have
 furnished to the ignorant world.
 </p><p>
 But even with the extremely meagre data at hand, Science has been
 able to see the necessity of throwing back nearly every Babylonian
 date, and has done so quite generously. We learn from Professor
 Sayce that even the archaic statues at Tel-loh, in Lower Babylonia,
 have suddenly been assigned a date contemporary with the fourth
 dynasty in Egypt. Unfortunately, dynasties and Pyramids have the
 fate of geological periods; their dates are arbitrary, and depend
 on the respective whims of the men of science. Archaeologists
 know now, it is said, that the afore-mentioned statues are fashioned
 out of green diorite, that can only be got in the Peninsula of
 Sinai; and "they accord in the style of art, and in the standard
 of measurement employed, with the similar diorite statues of the
 pyramid builders of the third and fourth Egyptian dynasties. .
 . . . Moreover, the only possible period for a Babylonian occupation
 of the Sinaitic quarries must be placed shortly after the close
 of the epoch at which the pyramids were built; and thus only can
 we understand how the name of Sinai could have been derived from
 that of Sin, the primitive Babylonian moon-god." This is
 very logical, but what is the date fixed for these "dynasties"?
 Sanchoniathon's and Manetho's Synchronistic tables and their figures
 have been rejected, or whatever</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 693 NO AGREEMENT BETWEEN SCIENTISTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 remained of these after holy Eusebius' handling of them; and still
 we have to remain satisfied with the four or five thousand years
 <strong>B.C</strong>. so liberally allotted to Egypt. At all events
 one point is gained. There is, at last, a city on the face of
 the earth which is allowed, at least, 6,000 years, and it is Eridu.
 Geology has found it out. According to Professor Sayce again,
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 "They are now also able to obtain time for the silting up
 of the head of the Persian Gulf, which demands a lapse of between
 5,000 and 6,000 years since the period when Eridu, now twenty-five
 miles inland, was the seaport at the mouth of the Euphrates, and
 the seat of Babylonian commerce with Southern Arabia and India.
 More than all, the new chronology gives time for the long series
 of eclipses recorded in the great astronomical work called 'The
 Observations of Bel'; and we are also enabled to understand the
 otherwise perplexing change in the position of the vernal equinox,
 which has occurred since our present zodiacal signs were named
 by the Earliest Babylonian astronomers. When the Accadian calendar
 was arranged and the Accadian months were named, the sun at the
 vernal equinox was not, as now, in Pisces, or even in Aries, but
 in Taurus. The rate of the precession of the equinoxes being known,
 we learn that at the vernal equinox the sun was in Taurus from
 about 4,700 years <strong>B.C</strong>., and we thus obtain astronomical
 limits of date which cannot be impugned."*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 It may make our position plainer if we state at once that we use
 Sir C. Lyell's nomenclature for the ages and periods, and that
 when we talk of the Secondary and Tertiary age, of the Eocene,
 Miocene and Pliocene periods -- this is simply to make our facts
 more comprehensible. Since these ages and periods have not yet
 been allowed fixed and determined durations, 2 1/2 and 15 million
 years being assigned at different times to one and the same age
 (the Tertiary) -- and since no two geologists and naturalists
 seem to agree on this point -- Esoteric teachings may remain quite
 indifferent to whether man is shown to appear in the Secondary
 or the Tertiary age. If the latter age may be allowed even so
 much as 15 million years' duration -- well and good; for the Occult
 doctrine, jealously guarding its real and correct figures as far
 as concerns the First, Second, and two-thirds of the Third Root-Race
 -- gives clear information upon one point only -- the age of "Vaivasvata
 Manu's humanity." (<em>Vide Part I., Vol. II., </em>"<em>Chronology
 of the Brahmins.</em>")
 </p><p>
 Another definite statement is this: It is during the so-called
 Eocene period that the continent to which the Fourth Race belonged,
 and on which it lived and perished, showed the first symptoms
 of sinking. And it was in the Miocene age, that it was finally
 destroyed -- save the little island mentioned by Plato. It is
 these points that have to be checked by the scientific data.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * From a Report of the "Hibbert Lectures, 1887. Lectures
 on the Origin and Growth of Religion, and Illustrated by the Religion
 of the Ancient Babylonians." By A. H. Sayce. (London: Williams
 and Norgate.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 694 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <b>A</b>.
 </p><p>
 <b>M</b>ODERN <b>S</b>CIENTIFIC <b>S</b>PECULATIONS ABOUT THE
 <b>A</b>GES OF THE <b>G</b>LOBE,<br>
 <b>A</b>NIMAL <b>E</b>VOLUTION, AND <b>M</b>AN.
 </p><p>
 May we not be permitted to throw a glance at the works of Specialists?
 The work on "Comparative Geology: the World-Life," by
 Prof. A. Winchell, furnishes us with curious data. Here we find
 an opponent of the Nebular theory, a reverend gentleman, smiting
 with all the force of the hammer of his <em>odium theologicum
 </em>on the <em>rather </em>contradictory hypothesis of the great
 stars of Science, in the matter of sidereal and cosmical phenomena
 based on their respective relations to terrestrial durations.
 The "too imaginative physicists and naturalists" do
 not fare very easily under this shower of their own speculative
 figures when placed side by side, and cut rather a sorry figure.
 Thus he shows: --
 </p><p>
 "Sir William Thomson, on the basis of the observed principles
 of cooling, concludes that no more than ten million years (elsewhere
 he makes it 100,000,000) can have elapsed since the temperature
 of the Earth was sufficiently reduced to sustain vegetable life.*
 Helmholz calculates that twenty million years would suffice for
 the original nebula to condense to the present dimensions of the
 sun. Prof. S. Newcomb requires only ten millions to attain a temperature
 of 212 [[degrees]] Fahr.** Croll estimates <em>seventy </em>million
 years for the diffusion of the heat, etc.*** Bischof calculates
 that 350<em> million years </em>would be required for the earth
 to cool from a temperature of 2,000 [[degrees]] to 200 [[degrees]]
 Centigrade. Read, basing his estimate on observed rates of denudation,
 demands 500 million years since sedimentation began in Europe.****
 Lyell ventured a rough guess of 240 million years; Darwin thought
 300 million years demanded by the organic transformations which
 his theory contemplates, and Huxley is disposed to demand a 1,000
 millions" (!!).
 </p><p>
 To this Prof. Winchell observes that "some biologists . .
 . . seem to close their eyes tight and leap at one bound into
 the abyss of millions of years, of which they have no more adequate
 estimate than of infinity."***** Then he proceeds to give
 what he takes to be more correct geological figures: a few will
 suffice.
 </p><p>
 According to Sir W. Thomson "the whole incrusted age of the
 world is 80,000,000 years"; and agreeably with Prof. Houghton's
 calculations of a minimum limit for the time since the elevation
 of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <em>Nat. Philos. </em>App. D., Trans. Royal Soc., Edin.
 </p><p>
 ** "Popular Astronomy," p. 509.
 </p><p>
 *** "Climate and Time," p. 335.
 </p><p>
 **** Read. Address, "Liverpool Geolog. Society, 1876."
 </p><p>
 ***** "World-Life," p. 180.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 695 MATERIALISTS AT LOGGER-HEADS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Europe and Asia, three hypothetical ages for three <em>possible
 </em>and different modes of upheaval are given: varying from the
 modest figures of 640,730 years, through 4,170,000 years to the
 tremendous figures of 27,491,000 years!!
 </p><p>
 This <em>is enough, </em>as one can see, to cover our claims for
 the four continents and even the figures of the Brahmins.
 </p><p>
 Further calculations, the details of which the reader may find
 in Prof. Winchell's work,* bring Houghton to an approximation
 of the sedimentary age of the globe -- 11,700,000 years. These
 figures are found too small by the author, who forthwith extends
 them to 37,000,000 years.
 </p><p>
 Again, according to Croll,** 2,500,000 years "represents
 the time since the beginning of the Tertiary age" in one
 work; and according to another modification of his view, 15,000,000
 only have elapsed since the beginning of the Eocene period;***
 which, being the first of the three Tertiary periods, leaves the
 student suspended between 2 1/2 and 15 millions. But if one has
 to hold to the former moderate figures, then the whole incrusted
 age of the world would be 131,600,000 years.****
 </p><p>
 As the last glacial period extended from 240,000 to 80,000 years
 ago (Prof. Croll's view), therefore, man must have appeared on
 earth from 100 to 120,000 years ago. But, as says Prof. Winchell,
 with reference to the antiquity of the Mediterranean race, "it
 is generally believed to have made its appearance during the later
 decline of the continental glaciers." Yet, he adds, this
 "does not concern, however, the antiquity of the <em>Black
 and Brown races, </em>since there are numerous evidences of their
 existence in more southern regions, in times remotely pre-glacial"
 (p. 379).
 </p><p>
 As a specimen of geological <em>certainty and agreement, </em>these
 figures also may be added. Three authorities -- Messrs. T. Belt,
 <strong>F.G.S</strong>.; J. Croll, <strong>F.R.S</strong>.; and
 Robert Hunt, <strong>F.R.S</strong>., -- in estimating the time
 that has elapsed since the Glacial epoch, give absolutely different
 figures, namely: --
 </p><p>
 Mr. Belt ... 20,000 years.<br>
 Mr. J. Croll ... 240,000 "<br>
 Mr. R. Hunt ... 80,000 "
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "World-Life," pp. 367-8.
 </p><p>
 ** "Climate and Time."
 </p><p>
 *** Quoted in Mr. Ch. Gould's "Mythical Monsters," p.
 84.
 </p><p>
 **** According to Bischof, 1,004,177 years -- according to Chevandier's
 calculations 672,788 years -- were required for the so-called
 coal formation. "The <em>tertiary</em> strata, about 1,000
 feet in thickness, required for their development about 350,000
 years." See "Force and Matter," Buchner, J. F.
 Collingwood's edition.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 696 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (But see "The Ice-Age Climate and Time," <em>Popular
 Science Review, </em>Vol. xiv., p. 242.)
 </p><p>
 No wonder if Mr. Pengelly confesses that "it is at present
 and <em>perhaps always will be </em>IMPOSSIBLE to reduce, even
 approximately, geological time into years <em>or even into millenniums</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Vide supra, </em>foot-note). A wise word of advice from
 the Occultists to the gentlemen geologists: they ought to imitate
 the cautious example of Masons. As chronology, they say, cannot
 measure the era of the creation, therefore, their "Antient
 and Primitive Rite" uses 000,000,000 as the nearest approach
 to reality.
 </p><p>
 The same uncertainty, contradictions and disagreement reign on
 all other subjects.
 </p><p>
 The scientific authorities on the Descent of Man are again, for
 all practical purposes, a delusion and a snare. There are many
 <em>anti</em>-Darwinists in the British Association, and "Natural
 Selection" begins to lose ground. Though at one time the
 saviour, which seemed to rescue the learned theorists from a final
 intellectual collapse into the abyss of fruitless hypothesis,
 it begins to be distrusted. Even Mr. Huxley is showing signs of
 truancy to "Selection," and thinks "natural selection
 <em>not the sole </em>factor": --
 </p><blockquote>
 "We greatly suspect that she (Nature) does make considerable
 jumps in the way of variation now and then, and that these saltations
 give rise to some of the gaps which appear to exist in the series
 of known forms" (<em>Review of Kolliker</em>'<em>s Criticisms</em>)<em>.</em>
 
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Again, in "Fallacies of Darwinism," (p. 160), C. R.
 Bree, <strong>M.D</strong>., argues in this wise in considering
 the fatal gaps in Mr. Darwin's theory: --
 </p><p>
 "It must be again called to mind that the intermediate forms
 must have been vast in numbers. . . . . Mr. St. George Mivart
 believes that <em>change in evolution may occur more quickly than
 is generally believed</em>;<em> </em>but Mr. Darwin sticks manfully
 to his belief, and again tells us '<em>natura non facit saltum</em>'<em>
 </em>"<em> -- </em>wherein the Occultists are at one with
 Mr. Darwin.
 </p><p>
 Esoteric teaching fully corroborates the idea of nature's slowness
 and dignified progression. "Planetary impulses" are
 all periodical. Yet this Darwinian theory, correct as it is in
 minor particulars, agrees no more with Occultism than with Mr.
 Wallace, who, in his "Contributions to the Theory of Natural
 Selection," shows pretty conclusively that something <em>more</em>
 than "natural selection" was requisite to produce physical
 man.
 </p><p>
 Let us, meanwhile, examine the <em>scientific </em>objections
 to this scientific theory, and see what they are.
 </p><p>
 Mr. St. George Mivart is found arguing that --
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . . ". . . . it will be a moderate computation to allow
 25,000,000 for the deposition of the strata down to and including
 the Upper Silurian. If, 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 697 MIVART'S BILLIONS OF YEARS.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 then, the evolutionary work done during this deposition only represents
 a hundredth part of the sum total, we shall require 2,500,000,000
 years for the complete development of the whole <em>animal</em>
 Kingdom to its present state. Even one quarter of this, however,
 would far exceed the time which physics and astronomy seem able
 to allow for the completion of this process. Finally, a difficulty
 exists as to the reason of the absence of rich fossiliferous deposits
 in the oldest strata -- if life was then as abundant and varied,
 as on the Darwinian theory it must have been. Mr. Darwin himself
 admits 'the case at present must remain inexplicable'; and this
 may be truly urged as a valid argument against the views entertained
 in his own work. . . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Thus, then, we find a wonderful (and <em>on Darwinian principles
 all but inexplicable</em>)<em> </em>absence of minutely transitional
 forms. All the most marked groups . . . . . <em>appear at once
 upon the scene. </em>Even the horse, the animal whose pedigree
 has been probably best preserved, affords no conclusive evidence
 of specific origin by infinitesimal fortuitous variations; while
 some forms, as the labyrinthodonts and trilobites, which seemed
 to exhibit gradual change, are shown by further investigation
 to do nothing of the sort. . . . All these difficulties are avoided
 if we admit that new forms of animal life of all degrees of complexity
 appear from time to time with comparative suddenness, being evolved
 according to laws in part depending on surrounding conditions,
 <em>in part</em> <em>internal</em> -- similar to the way in which
 crystals (and perhaps from recent researches the lowest forms
 of life) build themselves up according to the internal laws of
 their component substance and in harmony and correspondence with
 all environing influences and conditions." ("<em>Genesis
 of Species,</em>"<em> </em>p. 142.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 "The internal laws of their component substance." These
 are wise words, and the admission of the possibility, a prudent
 one. But how can these <em>internal laws </em>be ever recognized,
 if Occult teaching is discarded? As a friend writes, while drawing
 our attention to the above speculations: "In other words,
 the doctrine of Planetary <em>Life-Impulses </em>must be admitted.
 Otherwise, why are species now <em>stereotyped, </em>and why do
 even domesticated breeds of pigeons and many animals relapse into
 their ancestral types when left to themselves?" But the teaching
 about planetary life-impulses has to be clearly defined and as
 clearly understood if present confusion would not be made still
 more perplexing. All these difficulties would vanish as the shadows
 of night disappear before the light of the rising Sun, if the
 following esoteric axioms were admitted: (<em>a</em>) the enormous
 antiquity (and the existence) of our planetary chain; (<em>b</em>)
 the actuality of the Seven Rounds; (<em>c</em>) the separation
 of human races (outside the purely anthropological division) into
 Seven distinct Root-Races, of which our present European Humanity
 is the <em>fifth</em>;<em> </em>(<em>d</em>)<em> </em>the antiquity
 of Man in this (<em>Fourth</em>)<em> </em>Round; and finally (<em>e</em>)
 that as these Races evolve from ethereality to materiality, and
 from the latter back again into relative physical tenuity of texture,
 so every living (so-called) <em>organic </em>species of animals
 with vegetation included, changes with every new Root-Race. Were
 this admitted, if even only</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 698 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 along with other, and surely, on maturer consideration, <em>no
 less absurd, </em>suppositions, if Occult theories have to be
 considered "absurd" at present, then every difficulty
 would be made away with. Surely, Science ought to try and be <em>more
 logical </em>than it now is, as it can hardly maintain the theory
 of man's descent from an anthropoidal ancestor, and deny in the
 same breath any reasonable antiquity to that man! Once Mr. Huxley
 talks of "the vast intellectual chasm between the man and
 ape," and "the present enormous gulf between the two,"*
 and if he admits the necessity of extending Scientific allowances
 for the age of man on earth for such slow and progressive development,
 then all those men of Science, who are of his way of thinking,
 at any rate, ought to come to some approximate figures, at least,
 and agree upon the probable duration of those Pliocene, Miocene,
 and Eocene periods of which so much is said, and about which nothing
 definite is known -- if they dare not venture <em>beyond. </em>But
 no two scientists seem to agree. Every period seems to be a mystery
 in its duration, and a thorn in the side of the geologists; and,
 as just shown, they are unable to harmonize their conclusions
 even with regard to the comparatively recent geological formations.
 Thus, no reliance can be placed on their figures when they do
 give any, for with them it is all either millions or simply thousands
 of years!
 </p><p>
 That which is said may be strengthened by the confessions made
 by themselves and the synopsis of it, found in that "Circle
 of Sciences," the <em>Encyclopaedia Britannica, </em>which
 shows the <em>mean</em> accepted in the geological and anthropological
 riddles. In that work the cream of the most authoritative opinions
 is skimmed off; nevertheless, we find in it the refusal to assign
 any definite chronological date, even to such, comparatively speaking,
 late epochs as the Neolithic era, though, for a wonder, an age
 is established for the beginnings of certain geological periods;
 at any rate of some few, the duration of which could hardly be
 shortened any more, without an immediate conflict with facts.
 </p><p>
 Thus, it is surmised in the great <em>Encyclopaedia </em>(Vol.
 X., art. "Geology," p. 227), that "100 million
 years have passed . . . . . since the solidification of our Earth,
 when the earliest form of life appeared upon it.**"
 </p><p>
 But it seems quite as hopeless to try to convert the modern Geologists
 and Ethnologists as it is to make Darwinian Naturalists perceive
 their mistakes. About the Aryan Root-Race and its origins,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Man's Place in Nature," p. 102<em>, note.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** "100,000,000 of years is probably amply sufficient for
 all the requirements of Geology," says the text. In France,
 some <em>savants </em>do not find it nearly "sufficient."
 Le Couturier claims for the same 350 million years; Buffon was
 satisfied with 34 millions -- but there are those in the more
 modern schools who will not be content under 500 million years.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 699 THE ADEPT-ASTRONOMER.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Science knows as little as of the men from other planets. With
 the exception of Flammarion and a few mystics among astronomers,
 even the habitableness of other planets is mostly denied. Yet
 such great adept astronomers were the Scientists of the earliest
 races of the Aryan stock, that they seem to have known far more
 about the races of Mars and Venus than the modern Anthropologist
 knows of those of the early stages of the Earth.
 </p><p>
 Let us leave modern Science aside for a moment and turn to ancient
 knowledge. As we are assured by Archaic Scientists that all such
 geological cataclysms -- from the upheaval of oceans, deluges,
 and shifting of continents, down to the present year's cyclones,
 hurricanes, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tidal waves, and
 even the extraordinary weather and seeming shifting of seasons
 which perplexes all European and American meteorologists -- are
 due to, and depend on the moon and planets; aye, that even modest
 and neglected constellations have the greatest influence on the
 meteorological and cosmical changes, over, and within our earth,
 let us give one moment's attention to our sidereal despots and
 rulers of our globe and men. Modern Science denies any such influence;
 archaic Science affirms it. We may see what both say with regard
 to this question.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <b>B</b>.
 </p><p>
 <b>O</b>N <b>C</b>HAINS OF <b>P</b>LANETS AND THEIR <b>P</b>LURALITY.
 </p><p>
 Did the Ancients know of worlds besides their own? What are the
 data of the Occultists in affirming that every globe is a septenary
 chain of worlds -- of which only one member is visible -- and
 that these are, were, or will be, "man-bearing," just
 as every visible star or planet is? What do they mean by "a
 moral and physical influence" of the sidereal worlds on our
 globes?
 </p><p>
 Such are the questions often put to us, and they have to be considered
 from every aspect. To the first of the two queries the answer
 is: -- We believe it because the first law in nature is uniformity
 in diversity, and the second -- analogy. "As above, so below."
 That time is gone by for ever, when, although our pious ancestors
 believed that our earth was in the centre of the universe, the
 church and her arrogant servants could insist that we should regard
 as a blasphemy the supposition that any other planet could be
 inhabited. Adam and Eve, the Serpent, and the Original Sin followed
 by atonement through blood, have been too long in the way, and
 thus was universal truth sacrificed to the insane conceit of us
 little men.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 700 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Now what are the proofs thereof? Except inferential evidence and
 logical reasoning, there are none for the profane. To the Occultists,
 who believe in the knowledge acquired by countless generations
 of Seers and Initiates, the data offered in the Secret Books are
 all-sufficient. The general public needs other proofs, however.
 There are some Kabalists and even some Eastern Occultists, who,
 failing to find uniform evidence upon this point in all the mystic
 works of the nations, hesitate to accept the teaching. Even such
 "uniform evidence" will be forthcoming presently. Meanwhile,
 we may approach the subject from its general aspect, and see whether
 belief in it is so very absurd, as some scientists along with
 other Nicodemuses would have it. Unconsciously, perhaps, in thinking
 of a plurality of inhabited "<em>Worlds</em>," we imagine
 them to be like the globe we inhabit and peopled by beings more
 or less resembling ourselves. And in so doing we are only following
 a natural instinct. Indeed, so long as the enquiry is confined
 to the life-history of this globe we can speculate on this question
 with some profit, and ask ourselves what were the "<em>Worlds</em>"<em>
 </em>spoken of in all the ancient scriptures of Humanity, with
 some hope of at least asking an intelligible <em>question. </em>But
 how do we know (<em>a</em>) what kind of Beings inhabit the globes
 in general; and (<em>b</em>) whether<em> those </em>who rule planets
 superior to our own, do not exercise the same influence on our
 earth<em> consciously, </em>that we may exercise <em>unconsciously
 -- </em>say on the small planets (planetoids or asteroids) in
 the long run, by our cutting the Earth to pieces, opening canals,
 and thereby entirely changing our climates. Of course, like Caesar's
 wife, the <em>planetoids </em>cannot be affected by our suspicion.
 They are too far, etc., etc. Believing in esoteric astronomy,
 however, we are not so sure of that.
 </p><p>
 But when, extending our speculations beyond our planetary chain,
 we try to cross the limits of the solar system, then indeed we
 act as do presumptuous fools. For -- while accepting the old Hermetic
 axiom: "As above, so below" -- we may well believe that
 as Nature on Earth displays the most careful economy, utilizing
 every vile and waste thing in her marvellous transformations,
 and withal <em>never</em> repeating herself -- we may justly conclude
 that there is no other globe in all her infinite systems so closely
 resembling this earth that the ordinary powers should be able
 to imagine and reproduce its semblance and containment.*
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * We are taught that the highest Dhyan Chohans, or Planetary Spirits
 (beyond the cognizance of the law of analogy), are in ignorance
 of what lies beyond the visible planetary systems, since their
 essence cannot assimilate itself to that of worlds beyond our
 solar system. When they reach a higher stage of evolution these
 other universes will be open to them; meanwhile they have complete
 knowledge of all the worlds within and beneath the limits of our
 solar system.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 701 STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 And indeed we find in the romances as in all the so-called scientific
 fictions and spiritistic <em>revelations </em>from moon, stars,
 and planets, merely fresh combinations or modifications of the
 men and things, the passions and forms of life with which we are
 familiar, when even on the other planets of our own system nature
 and life are entirely different from ours. Swedenborg was pre-eminent
 in inculcating such an erroneous belief.
 </p><p>
 But even more. The ordinary man has no experience of any state
 of consciousness other than that to which the physical senses
 link him. Men dream; they sleep the profound sleep which is too
 deep for dreams to impress the physical brain; and in these states
 there must still be consciousness. How, then, while these mysteries
 remain unexplored, can <em>we</em> hope to speculate with profit
 on the nature of globes which, in the economy of nature, must
 needs belong to states of consciousness other and quite different
 from <em>any </em>which man experiences here?
 </p><p>
 And this is true to the letter. For even great adepts (those initiated
 of course), trained seers though they are, can claim thorough
 acquaintance with the nature and appearance of planets and their
 inhabitants belonging to our solar system only. They <em>know
 </em>that almost all the planetary worlds are inhabited, but can
 have access to -- even in spirit -- only those of our system;
 and they are also aware how difficult it is, <em>even for them,
 </em>to put themselves into full rapport even with the planes
 of consciousness <em>within</em> our system, but differing from
 the states of consciousness possible on this globe; <em>i.e.</em>,
 on the three planes of the chain of spheres beyond our earth.
 Such knowledge and intercourse are possible to them because they
 have learned how to penetrate to planes of consciousness which
 are closed to the perceptions of ordinary men; but were they to
 communicate their knowledge, the world would be no wiser, because
 it lacks that experience of other forms of perception which alone
 could enable them to grasp what was told them.
 </p><p>
 Still the fact remains that most of the planets, as the stars
 beyond our system, are inhabited, a fact which has been admitted
 by the men of science themselves. Laplace and Herschell believed
 it, though they wisely abstained from imprudent speculation; and
 the same conclusion has been worked out and supported with an
 array of scientific considerations by C. Flammarion, the well-known
 French Astronomer. The arguments he brings forward are strictly
 scientific, and such as to appeal even to a materialistic mind,
 which would remain unmoved by such thoughts as those of Sir David
 Brewster, the famous physicist, who writes: --
 </p><p>
 "Those 'barren spirits' or 'base souls,' as the poet calls
 them, who might be led to believe that the Earth is the only inhabited
 body in the universe, would have no difficulty in conceiving the
 earth also to</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 702 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 have been destitute of inhabitants. What is more, if such minds
 were acquainted with the deductions of geology, they would admit
 that it was uninhabited for myriads of years; and here we come
 to the impossible conclusion that during these myriads of years
 there was not a single intelligent creature in the vast domains
 of the Universal King, and that before the protozoic formations
 there existed neither plant nor animal in all the infinity of
 space"!*
 </p><p>
 Flammarion shows, in addition, that all the conditions of life
 -- even as <em>we</em> know it -- are present on some at least
 of the planets, and points to the fact that these conditions must
 be much more favourable on them than they are on our Earth.
 </p><p>
 Thus scientific reasoning, as well as observed facts, concur with
 the statements of the seer and the innate voice in man's own heart
 in declaring that life -- intelligent, conscious life -- <em>must
 </em>exist on other worlds than ours.
 </p><p>
 But this is the limit beyond which the ordinary faculties of man
 cannot carry him. Many are the romances and tales, some purely
 fanciful, others bristling with scientific knowledge, which have
 attempted to imagine and describe life on other globes. But one
 and all, they give but some distorted copy of the drama of life
 around us. It is either, with Voltaire, the men of our own race
 under a microscope, or, with de Bergerac, a graceful play of fancy
 and satire; but we always find that at bottom the new world is
 but the one we ourselves live in. So strong is this tendency that
 even great natural, though non-initiated seers, when untrained,
 fall a victim to it; witness Swedenborg, who goes so far as to
 dress the inhabitants of Mercury, whom he meets with in the spirit-world,
 in clothes such as are worn in Europe.
 </p><p>
 Commenting on this tendency, Flammarion in his work "<em>Sur
 la Pluralite des Mondes habites,</em>"<em> </em>says: --
 "It seems as if in the eyes of those authors who have written
 on this subject, the Earth were the type of the Universe, and
 the Man of Earth, the type of the inhabitants of the heavens.
 It is, on the contrary, much more probable, that, since the nature
 of other planets is essentially varied, and the surroundings and
 conditions of existence essentially different, while the forces
 which preside over the creation of beings and the substances which
 enter into their mutual constitution are essentially distinct,
 it would follow that our mode of existence cannot be regarded
 as in any way applicable to other globes.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Since no single atom in the entire Kosmos is without life and
 consciousness, how much more then its mighty globes? -- though
 they remain sealed books to us men who can hardly enter even into
 the consciousness of the forms of life nearest us?
 </p><p>
 We do not know <em>ourselves, </em>then how can we, if we have
 never been trained to it and initiated, fancy that we can penetrate
 the consciousness of the smallest of the animals around us?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 703 WORLDS MENTIONED IN THE BIBLE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Those who have written on this subject have allowed themselves
 to be dominated by terrestrial ideas, and fell therefore into
 error." ("<em>Pluralite des Mondes,</em>"<em> </em>p.
 439.)
 </p><p>
 But Flammarion himself falls into the very error which he here
 condemns, for he tacitly takes the conditions of life on earth
 as the standard by which to determine the degree to which other
 planets are adapted for habitation by "other Humanities."
 </p><p>
 Let us, however, leave these profitless and empty speculations,
 which, though they seem to fill our hearts with a glow of enthusiasm
 and to enlarge our mental and spiritual grasp, do but in reality
 cause a factitious stimulation, and blind us more and more to
 our ignorance not only of the world we inhabit, but even of the
 infinitude contained within ourselves.
 </p><p>
 When, therefore, we find in the Bibles of Humanity "other
 worlds" spoken of, we may safely conclude that they not only
 refer to other states of our planetary chain and Earth, but also
 to other inhabited globes -- stars and planets; withal, that the
 latter were never speculated upon. The whole of antiquity believed
 in the Universality of life. But no really initiated seer of any
 civilized nation has ever taught that life on other stars could
 be judged by the standard of terrestrial life. That which is generally
 meant by "earths" and worlds, relates (<em>a</em>) to
 the "rebirths" of our globe after each manvantara and
 a long period of "obscuration"; and (<em>b</em>) to
 the periodical and entire changes of the Earth's surface, when
 Continents disappear, to make room for Oceans, and Oceans and
 Seas are violently displaced and sent rolling to the poles, to
 cede their emplacements to new Continents.
 </p><p>
 We may begin with the Bible -- the youngest of the World-Scriptures.
 In<em> Ecclesiastes, </em>chap. i., we read these words of the
 King-Initiate: -- "<em>One</em> generation passeth away and
 <em>another </em>generation cometh, but <em>the earth abideth
 for ever,</em>"<em> </em>and again, "The thing that
 hath been, it <em>is </em>that which shall be; and that which
 is done, <em>is </em>that which shall be done, and there is no
 new thing under the sun." Under these words it is not easy
 to see the reference to the successive cataclysms by which the
 Races of mankind are swept away, or, going further back, to the
 various transitions of the globe during the process of its formation.
 But if we are told that this refers only to <em>our </em>world<em>
 as we now see it, -- </em>then we shall refer the reader to the
 New Testament, where St. Paul speaks (in <em>Hebrews i.</em>)<em>
 </em>of the Son (the manifested Power) whom (God) hath appointed
 heir of all things, by <em>whom also he made the worlds </em>(plural.)*
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This relates to the <em>Logos </em>of every Cosmogony. The <em>unknown
 </em>Light -- with which he is said to be co-eternal and coeval
 -- is reflected in the "First-Born," the <em>Protogonos</em>;
 [[Footnote continued on next page]]</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 704 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This "Power" is Hokhmah or (Chochmah) the Wisdom and
 the Word. We shall probably be told that by this term "worlds,"
 the stars, heavenly bodies, etc., were meant. But apart from the
 fact that "stars" were not known as "worlds"
 to the ignorant editors of the Epistles, if even they must have
 been known to Paul, who was an Initiate ("a Master-Builder"),
 we can quote on this point an eminent theologian, Cardinal Wiseman.
 In Vol. I, p. 309, of his work treating of the indefinite period
 of the six days -- or shall we say "too definite" --
 period of the six days of creation and the 6,000 years, he confesses
 that we are in total darkness upon the meaning of that statement
 of St. Paul, unless we are permitted to suppose that allusion
 is made in it, <em>i.e., </em>the period which elapsed between
 the <em>first</em> and<em> second </em>verses of chapter i. of
 <em>Genesis -- </em>to those primitive revolutions, <em>i.e.</em>,
 the destructions and the re-productions (of the world) indicated
 in chapter i. of <em>Ecclesiastes</em>;<em> </em>or, to accept,
 with so many others, and in its <em>literal sense, </em>the passage
 (<em>Hebrews i. </em>1,) that speaks of the creation of <em>worlds
 -- </em>in plural. . . . . It is very singular, he adds, that
 all the cosmogonies should agree to suggest the same idea, and
 preserve the tradition of a first series of revolutions, owing
 to which the world was destroyed and again renewed.
 </p><p>
 Had the Cardinal studied the <em>Zohar </em>his doubts would have
 changed to certitude. Thus saith <em>Idra Suta </em>(in the "Zohar,"
 iii., 292, c.): "There were old worlds which perished as
 soon as they came into existence; worlds with and without form
 called <em>Scintillas -- </em>for they were like the sparks under
 the Smith's hammer, flying in all directions. Some were the primordial
 worlds which could not continue long, because the 'aged' -- his
 name be sanctified -- had not as yet assumed his form,* the workman
 was not yet the 'Heavenly man.' "** Again in the <em>Midrash,
 </em>written long before the <em>Kabala </em>of Simeon Ben Iochai,
 Rabbi Abahu explains: -- "The Holy One, blessed be his name,
 has successively formed and destroyed sundry worlds before this
 one*** . . . Now this refers both to the first races (the "Kings
 of Edom") and to the worlds <em>destroyed.</em>"<em>****</em>
 "Destroyed" means here what we call
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] and the Demiurgos or
 the Universal Mind directs his Divine Thought into the Chaos that
 under the fashioning of minor gods will be divided into the seven
 oceans -- <em>Sapta samudras. </em>It is Purusha, Ahura Mazda,
 Osiris, etc., and finally the gnostic Christos, who is in the
 Kabala, <em>Hokhmah </em>or Wisdom the "Word."
 </p><p>
 * The <em>form</em> of <em>Tikkun </em>or the <em>Protogonos,
 </em>the "first-born," <em>i.e.</em>, the universal
 form and idea, had not yet been mirrored in <em>Chaos.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** The "Heavenly man" is Adam Kadmon -- the synthesis
 of the Sephiroth, as "Manu Swayambhuva" is the synthesis
 of the Prajapatis.
 </p><p>
 *** Bereshith Rabba, Parsha <strong>IX.</strong> 
 </p><p>
 **** This refers to the <em>three Rounds </em>that preceded our
 <em>fourth</em> Round.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 705 WHO ARE THE KINGS OF EDOM? </h6>
 
 <p>
 "obscurations." This becomes evident when one reads
 further on the explanation given: -- "Still when it is said
 that they (the worlds) <em>perished, </em>it is only meant thereby
 that they (their humanities) lacked the true form, till the human
 (our) form came into being, in which all things are comprised
 and <em>which contains all forms</em>. . . . * -- it does not
 mean <em>death,</em> but only denotes a <em>sinking down from
 their status </em>. . ." (that of worlds in activity).**
 </p><p>
 When, therefore, we read of the destruction of the worlds, this
 word has many meanings, which are very clear in several of the
 Commentaries on the <em>Zohar </em>and Kabalistic treatises. As
 said elsewhere, it means not only the destruction of many worlds
 which have ended their life-career, but also that of the several
 continents which have disappeared, as also their decline and geographical
 change of place.
 </p><p>
 The mysterious "Kings of Edom" are sometimes referred
 to as the "Worlds" that had been destroyed; but it is
 a "cloak." The Kings who reigned in Edom before there
 reigned a King in Israel, or the "Edomite Kings," could
 never symbolize the "prior worlds," but only the "attempts
 at men" on this globe: the "pre-Adamite races,"
 of which the Zohar speaks, and which we explain as the <em>First
 </em>Root-Race. For, as, speaking of the six Earths (the six "limbs"
 of Microprosopus) it is said that the Seventh (our Earth) came
 not into the computation when the Six were created (the six spheres
 above our globe in the terrestrial chain), so the first seven
 Kings of Edom are left out of calculation in Genesis. By the law
 of analogy and permutation, in the "Chaldean Book of Numbers,"
 as also in the "Books of Knowledge" and of "Wisdom,"
 the "seven primordial worlds" mean also the "seven
 primordial" races (sub-races of the First Root-Race of the
 <em>Shadows</em>);<em> </em>and, again, the Kings of Edom are
 the sons of "Esau the father of the Edomites" (Gen.
 xxxvi. 43); <em>i.e.</em>, Esau represents in the Bible the race
 which stands between the Fourth and the Fifth, the Atlantean and
 the Aryan. "Two <em>nations </em>are in thy womb," saith
 the Lord to Rebekah; and Esau was <em>red</em> and<em> hairy.
 </em>From verse 24 to 34, ch. xxv. of <em>Genesis </em>contains
 the allegorical history of the birth of the Fifth Race.
 </p><p>
 "And the Kings of ancient days died and their chiefs (crowns)
 were found no more," says <em>Siphrah Dzenioutha </em>(3).<em>
 </em>. . . "The Head of a nation that has not been formed
 at the beginning in the likeness of the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This sentence contains a dual sense and a profound mystery in
 the occult sciences the secret of which <em>if</em>, and <em>when</em>,
 known -- confers tremendous powers on the Adept to <em>change
 his visible form.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** <em>Idra Suta, </em>Zohar, iii. 136, c. "A sinking down
 from their status" -- is plain; from active worlds they have
 fallen into a temporary obscuration -- they rest, and hence are
 entirely changed.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 706 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 White Head: its people is not from this Form," states the
 <em>Zohar </em>(iii.). . . . "Before it (the White Head,
 the Fifth Race or Ancient of the Ancients) arranged itself in
 its (own, or present) Form . . . all <em>worlds </em>have been
 destroyed; therefore it is written: And Bela, the Son of Beor,
 reigned in Edom" (Gen. xxxvi.). Here the "worlds"
 stand for races. "And he (such or another King of Edom) died,
 and another reigned in his stead" (<em>ibid</em> 31<em> et
 seq.</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 No Kabalist who has hitherto treated of the symbolism and allegory
 hidden under these "Kings of Edom" seems to have perceived
 more than one aspect of it. They are neither the "<em>worlds
 </em>that were destroyed," nor the "Kings that died"
 -- alone; but both, and much more, to treat of which there is
 no space at present. Therefore, leaving the mystic parables of
 the <em>Zohar, </em>we will return to the hard facts of materialistic
 science; first, however, citing a few from the long list of great
 thinkers who have believed in the plurality of inhabited worlds
 in general, and in worlds that preceded our own. These are, the
 great mathematicians Leibnitz and Bernouilli, Isaac Newton himself,
 as can be read in his "Optics"; Buffon, the naturalist;
 Condillac, the sceptic; Bailly, Lavater, Bernardin de St. Pierre,
 and, as a contrast to the two last named -- suspected at least
 of mysticism -- Diderot and most of the writers of the Encyclopaedia.
 Following these come Kant, the founder of modern philosophy; the
 poet philosophers, Goethe, Krause, Schelling; and many astronomers,
 from Bode, Fergusson and Herschell to Lalande and Laplace, with
 their many disciples in more recent years.
 </p><p>
 A brilliant list of honoured names indeed; but the facts of physical
 astronomy speak even more strongly in favour of the presence of
 life, even organised life, on other planets. Thus in four meteorites
 which fell respectively at Alais in France, the Cape of Good Hope,
 in Hungary, and again in France, there was found, on analysis,
 graphite, a form of carbon known to be invariably associated with
 organic life on this earth of ours. And that the presence of this
 carbon is not due to any action occurring within our atmosphere
 is shown by the fact that carbon has been found in the very centre
 of a meteorite; while in one which fell at Argueil, in the south
 of France, in 1857, there was found water and turf, the latter
 being always formed by the decomposition of vegetable substances.
 </p><p>
 And further, examining the astronomical conditions of the other
 planets, it is easy to show that several are far better adapted
 for the development of life and intelligence -- even under the
 conditions with which men are acquainted -- than is our earth.
 For instance, on the planet Jupiter the seasons, instead of varying
 between wide limits as do ours, change by almost imperceptible
 degrees, and last twelve times</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 707 WHAT FLAMMARION TELLS US.</h6>
 
 <p>
 as long as ours. Owing to the inclination of its axis the seasons
 on Jupiter are due almost entirely to the eccentricity of its
 orbit, and hence change slowly and regularly. We shall be told,
 that no life is possible on Jupiter, as it is in an incandescent
 state. But not all astronomers agree with this. For instance what
 we say, is said by M. Flammarion: and <em>he</em> ought to know.
 </p><p>
 On the other hand Venus would be less adapted for human life such
 as exists on earth, since its seasons are more extreme and its
 changes of temperature more sudden; though it is curious that
 the duration of the <em>day </em>is nearly the same on the four
 inner planets, Mercury, Venus, the Earth and Mars.
 </p><p>
 On Mercury, the Sun's heat and light are seven times what they
 are on the Earth, and astronomy teaches that it is enveloped in
 a very dense atmosphere. And as we see that life appears more
 active on earth in proportion to the light and heat of the sun,
 it would seem more than probable that its intensity is far, far
 greater on Mercury than here.
 </p><p>
 Venus, like Mercury, has a very dense atmosphere, as also has
 Mars and the snows which cover their poles, the clouds which hide
 their surface, the geographical configuration of their seas and
 continents, the variations of seasons and climates, are all closely
 analogous -- at least to the eye of the physical astronomer. But
 such facts and the considerations to which they give rise, have
 reference only to the possibility of the existence on these planets
 of human life as known on earth. That some forms of life such
 as we know are <em>possible </em>on these planets, has been long
 since abundantly demonstrated, and it seems perfectly useless
 to go into detailed questions of the physiology, etc., etc., of
 these hypothetical inhabitants, since after all the reader can
 arrive only at an imaginary extension of his familiar surroundings.
 It is better to rest content with the three conclusions which
 M. C. Flammarion, whom we have so largely quoted, formulates as
 rigorous and exact deductions from the known <em>facts </em>and
 laws of science.
 </p><p>
 I. The various forces which were active in the beginning of evolution
 gave birth to a great variety of beings on the several worlds;
 both in the organic and inorganic kingdoms.
 </p><p>
 <strong>II</strong>. The animated beings were constituted from
 the first according to forms and organisms in correlation with
 the physiological state of each inhabited globe.
 </p><p>
 <strong>III</strong>. The humanities of other worlds differ from
 us, as much in their inner organization as in their external physical
 type.
 </p><p>
 Finally the reader who may be disposed to question the validity
 of these conclusions as being opposed to the Bible, may be referred
 to an Appendix in M. Flammarion's work dealing in detail with
 this question; since in a work like the present it seems unnecessary
 to point out the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 708 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 logical absurdity of those churchmen, who deny the plurality of
 worlds on such grounds.
 </p><p>
 In this connection we may well recall those days when the burning
 zeal of the Primitive Church opposed the doctrine of the earth's
 rotundity, on the ground that the nations at the Antipodes would
 be outside the pale of salvation; and again how long it took for
 a nascent science to break down the idea of a solid firmament,
 in whose grooves the stars moved for the special edification of
 terrestrial humanity.
 </p><p>
 The theory of the earth's rotation was met by a like opposition
 -- even to the martyrdom of its discoverers -- because, besides
 depriving our orb of its dignified central position in space,
 this theory produced an appalling confusion of ideas as to the
 Ascension -- the terms "up" and "down" being
 proved to be merely relative, thus complicating not a little the
 question of the precise locality of heaven.*
 </p><p>
 According to the best modern calculations, there are no less than
 500,000,000 of stars of various magnitudes, within the range of
 the best telescopes. As to the distances between them, they are
 incalculable. Is, then, our microscopical Earth -- a "grain
 of sand on an infinite sea-shore" -- the only centre of intelligent
 life? Our own Sun, itself 1,300 times larger than our planet,
 sinks into insignificance beside that giant Sun -- Sirius, --
 and the latter in its turn is dwarfed by other luminaries in infinite
 Space. The self-centred conception of Jehovah as the special guardian
 of a small and obscure semi-nomadic tribe, is tolerable beside
 that which confines sentient existence to our microscopical globe.
 The primary reasons were without doubt: (1) Astronomical ignorance
 on the part of the early Christians, coupled with an exaggerated
 appreciation of man's own importance -- a crude form of selfishness;
 and (2) the dread that, if the hypothesis of millions of other
 inhabited globes was accepted, the crushing rejoinder would ensue
 -- "Was there then a Revelation to each world?" involving
 the idea of the Son of God eternally "going the rounds"
 as it were. Happily it is now unnecessary to waste time and energy
 in proving the possibility of the existence of such worlds. All
 intelligent persons admit it. That which now remains to be demonstrated
 is, that if it is once proven that there are inhabited worlds
 besides our own with humanities entirely different from each other
 as from our own -- as maintained in the Occult
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In that learned and witty work, "God and his Book,"
 by the redoubtable "Saladin" of Agnostic repute, the
 amusing calculation that, if Christ had ascended with the rapidity
 of a cannon ball, he would not have reached even Sirius yet, reminds
 one vividly of the past. It raises, perhaps, a not ill-founded
 suspicion that even our age of scientific enlightenment may be
 as grossly absurd in its materialistic negations, as the men of
 the middle ages were absurd and materialistic in their religious
 affirmations.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 709 SCIENCE AND OCCULTISM MAY YET AGREE.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 Sciences -- then the evolution of the preceding races is half
 proved. For where is that physicist or geologist who is prepared
 to maintain that the Earth has not changed scores of times, in
 the millions of years which have elapsed in the course of its
 existence; and changing its<em> </em>"skin," as it is
 called in Occultism, that the Earth has not had each time her
 special humanities adapted to such atmospheric and climatic conditions
 as were entailed. And if so, why should not our preceding four
 and entirely different mankinds have existed and thrived before
 our Adamic (Fifth Root) Race?
 </p><p>
 Before closing our debates, however, we have to examine the so-called
 organic evolution more closely. Let us search well and see whether
 it is quite impossible to make our Occult data and chronology
 agree up to a certain point with those of Science.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 [[This page continued in next section]]</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-3-05.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>