<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>he Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 402 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. <a name="DDE_LINK24"></a><a name="DDE_LINK26"></a>
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK27">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd2-1-22.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><p>
 <strong>W</strong>ESTERN <strong>S</strong>PECULATIONS,
 </p><p>
 FOUNDED ON THE <strong>G</strong>REEK AND <strong>P</strong>URANIC
 <strong>T</strong>RADITIONS.
 </p><p>
 Thus it becomes natural to find that, on even such meagre data
 as have reached the profane historian, Rudbeck, a Swedish scientist,
 tried to prove about two centuries ago that Sweden was the Atlantis
 of Plato. He thought, even, that he had found in the configuration
 of ancient Upsala, the situation and measurements given by the
 Greek sage of the capital of "Atlantis." As Bailly proved,
 Rudbeck was mistaken; but so was Bailly likewise, and still more.
 For Sweden and Norway had formed part and parcel of ancient Lemuria,
 and also of Atlantis on the European side, just as Eastern and
 Western Siberia and Kamschatka had belonged to it, on the Asiatic.
 Only, once more, when was it? We can find it out approximately
 only by studying the <em>Puranas, </em>if we will have nought
 to do with the Secret teachings.
 </p><p>
 Three quarters of a century have already elapsed since Captain
 (now Colonel) Wilford brought forward his fanciful theories about
 the British islands being the "White Island," the <em>Atala
 </em>of the Puranas. This was sheer nonsense, as the Atala is
 one of the seven <em>dwipas, </em>or islands, belonging to the
 nether lokas, one of the seven regions of Patala (the antipodes).
 Moreover, as Wilford* shows, the Puranas place it "on
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Wilford makes many mistakes. He identifies, for instance, Sveta-dwipa
 (the white Island), the "island in the northern part of <em>Toyambhudi,</em>"<em>
 </em>with England, and then tries to identify it with Atala (a
 nether region) and Atlantis. Now the former is the abode of Vishnu,
 <em>exoterically, </em>and Atala is a hell. He also places it
 in the Euxine or Icshu (Black) Sea, and then seems to connect
 it, in another place, with Africa and Atlas.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 403 ORIENTALISTS IN THE WRONG BOX.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the seventh zone or seventh climate," -- rather, on the seventh
 measure of heat: which thus locates it between the latitudes of
 24 and 28 degrees north. It is then to be sought on the same degree
 as the Tropic of Cancer, whereas England is between the 50th and
 60th degrees of latitude. Wilford speaks of it as <em>Atala, </em>Atlantis,
 the white island. And in vol. viii. of Journal of Asiatic Researches,
 p. 280, its enemy is called the "White Devil," the <em>demon
 of terror. </em>For he says: "In their (the Hindu and Mahomedan)
 romances, we see Kai-caus going to the mountain of '<em>As-burj,
 at the foot of which </em>the Sun sets,' to fight the <em>Dev-Sefid,
 </em>or white devil, the <em>Taradaitya </em>of the <em>Puranas,
 </em>whose abode was on the <em>seventh stage </em>of the world,
 answering to the seventh zone of the Buddhists, or the <em>White
 </em>Island."
 </p><p>
 Now here the Orientalists have been, and are still, facing the
 Sphinx's riddle, the wrong solution of which will ever destroy
 their authority, if not their persons, in the eyes of every Hindu
 scholar, even those who are not initiates. For there is not a
 statement in the Puranas -- on the conflicting details of which
 Wilford based his speculations -- which has not several meanings,
 and does not apply to both the physical and the metaphysical worlds.
 If the old Hindus divided the face of the globe geographically
 into seven zones, climates, dwipas, and into seven hells and seven
 heavens, allegorically, that measure of seven did not apply in
 both cases to the same localities. It is the north pole, the country
 of "Meru," which is the seventh division, as it answers
 to the Seventh principle (or fourth metaphysically), of the occult
 calculation, for it represents the region of Atma, of pure soul,
 and Spirituality. Hence Pushkara is shown <em>as the seventh zone,
 </em>or dwipa, which encompasses the <em>Kshira </em>Ocean, or
 Ocean of milk (the ever-frozen white region) in the Vishnu (and
 other) Puranas (<em>Book II ch. iv.</em>).<em> </em>And Pushkara,
 with its two <em>Varshas, </em>lies directly at the foot of Meru.
 For it is said that "the two countries north and south of
 Meru are <em>shaped like a</em> <em>bow,</em>"<em> </em>.
 . and that "one half of the surface of the earth is on the
 south of Meru and the other half on the north of Meru <em>-- beyond
 which</em> <em>is half of Pushkara</em>" (<em>Vishnu Purana,
 Asiatic Researches, etc.</em>).<em> </em>Geographically, then,
 Pushkara is America, Northern and Southern; and <em>allegorically
 </em>it is the prolongation of Jambu-dwipa* in the middle of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Every name in the Puranas has to be examined at least under
 two aspects; geographically, and metaphysically, in its allegorical
 application; <em>e.g., Nila, </em>the (blue) mountain which is
 one of the boundaries to the north of Meru, is again to be sought
 geographically in a mountain range in Orissa, and again in a mountain
 quite different from the others (in Western Africa). Jambu-dwipa
 is Vishnu's dominion -- the world, limited in the Puranas to our
 globe, the region which contains Meru <em>only</em>, and again
 it is divided to contain Bharata-varsha (India), its <em>best
 </em>division, and the fairest, says Parasara. Likewise with Pushkara
 and all others. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 404 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 which stands Meru, for it is the country inhabited by beings who
 live ten thousand years, who are free from sickness or failing;
 where there is neither virtue nor vice, caste or laws, for these
 men are "of the same nature as the Gods," (Vishnu Purana,
 Book <strong>II</strong>. ch. iv.). Wilford is inclined to see
 Meru in Mount Atlas, and locates there also the Loka-lokas. Now
 Meru, we are told, which is the <em>Swar</em>-loka, the abode
 of Brahma, of Vishnu, and the Olympus of Indian exoteric religions,
 is described geographically as "passing through the middle
 of the earth-globe, and protruding on either side" (<em>Surya
 Siddhanta, v. 5, Whitney</em>'<em>s</em> <em>trans.</em>)<em>.
 </em>On its upper station are the gods, on the nether (or South
 pole) is the abode of demons (hells). How can then Meru be Mount
 Atlas? Besides which, Taradaitya, a demon, cannot be placed on
 the seventh zone if the latter is identified with the "white"
 Island, which is <em>Sveta-dwipa, </em>for reasons given in the
 foot-note. (<em>Vide infra.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Wilford accuses the modern Brahmans "of having jumbled them
 (islands and countries) all together" (A.R. <strong>III</strong>.
 300); but<em> he</em> jumbled them still more. He believes that
 as the Brahmanda and Vayu Puranas divide the old continent into
 seven dwipas, said to be surrounded by a vast ocean, beyond which
 lie the regions and mountains of Atala (<em>ibid</em>), hence
 "most probably the Greeks divided the nation of Atlantis,
 which, as it could not be found after having once been discovered,
 they conceived to have been destroyed by some shock of nature."
 </p><p>
 Finding certain difficulties in believing that the Egyptian priests,
 Plato, and even Homer, had all built their notions of Atlantis
 on Atala -- a nether region located at the Southern pole -- we
 prefer holding to the statements given in the secret books. We
 believe in the seven "continents," four of which have
 already lived their day, the fifth still exists, and two are to
 appear in the future. We believe that each of these is not strictly
 a continent in the modern sense of the word, but that each name,
 from Jambu down to Pushkara,* refers to the geographical names
 given (i.) to the dry lands covering the face of the whole earth
 during the period of a Root-Race, in general; and (ii.) to what
 remained of these after a geological (race) <em>Pralaya</em> --
 as "Jambu," for instance: and (iii.) to those localities
 which will enter, after the future cataclysms, into the formation
 of new <em>universal </em>"continents," peninsulas,
 or dwipas** -- each continent being, in one sense, a greater or
 smaller region of dry land surrounded with water. Thus, that whatever
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Jambu, Plaksha, Salmali, Kusa, Krauncha, Saka, and Pushkara.
 </p><p>
 ** Such as Saka and Pushkara, for instance, which do not yet exist,
 but into which will enter such lands as some portions of America,
 of Africa, and Central Asia, with the Gobi region. Let us bear
 in mind that <em>Upadwipas </em>means<em> </em>"<em>root</em>"<em>
 </em>islands, or the dry land in general.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 405 FUTURE CONTINENTS, SYMBOLIZED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "jumble" the nomenclature of these may represent to
 the profane, there is none, in fact, to him who has the key.
 </p><p>
 Thus, we believe <em>we know </em>that, though two of the Puranic
 "islands" -- the <em>sixth and seventh </em>"continents"
 -- are yet to come, nevertheless there <em>were, </em>or there
 <em>are</em>, lands which will enter into the composition of the
 future dry lands, of new earths whose geographical faces will
 be entirely changed, as were those of the past. Therefore we find
 in the Puranas that Saka-dwipa is (or will be) a continent, and
 that Sankha-dwipa, as shown in the Vayu Purana, is only "a
 minor island," one of the nine divisions (to which Vayu adds
 six more) of Bharata Varsha. Because Sankha-dwipa was peopled
 by "Mlechchhas (unclean foreigners), who worshipped Hindu
 divinities," therefore they were connected with India.* This
 accounts for Sankhasura, a King of a portion of Sankha-dwipa,
 who was killed by Krishna; that King who resided in the palace
 "which was an ocean shell, and whose subjects lived in shells
 also," says Wilford.
 </p><p>
 "On the banks of the Nile** (?) there were frequent contests
 between the Devatas (divine beings, demi-gods) and the Daityas
 (giants); but the latter tribe having prevailed, their King, Sankhasura,
 who resided in the Ocean, made frequent incursions in the night"
 (<em>As. Res.,</em> Vol.<strong> III</strong>. 225.)
 </p><p>
 It is not on the banks of the <em>Nile, </em>but on the coasts
 of Western Africa, south of where now lies Morocco, that these
 battles took place. There was a time when the whole of the Sahara
 desert was a sea, then a continent as fertile as the Delta, and
 then, only after another temporary submersion, it became a desert
 similar to that other wilderness, the desert of Shamo or Gobi.
 This is shown in Puranic tradition, for on the same page as above
 cited, it is said: "The people were between two fires; for,
 while Sankhasura was ravaging one side of the continent, Krauncha
 (or Cracacha), King of Kraunch, used to desolate the other; both
 armies . . . thus <em>changed the most fertile regions into a
 savage desert.</em>"
 </p><p>
 That not only the last island of Atlantis, spoken of by Plato,
 but a large continent, first divided, and then broken later on
 into seven peninsulas and islands (called <em>dwipas</em>)<em>,
 </em>preceded Europe, is sure. It covered the whole of the North
 and South Atlantic regions, as well as portions of the North and
 South Pacific, and had islands even in the Indian Ocean (relics
 of Lemuria). The claim is corroborated by Indian Puranas, Greek
 writers, and Asiatic, Persian, and Mohammedan traditions. Wilford,
 who confuses sorely the Hindu and the Mussulman legends, shows
 this, however, clearly. (<em>See Vol. VIII., X. and XI. of</em>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * They were called demons, <em>Asuras, </em>giants, and monsters,
 because of their wickedness; and thus their country was likened
 to Atala -- a hell, because of that.
 </p><p>
 ** Not on the river Nile, surely, but near the <em>Nila</em> mountains
 of the Atlas range.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 406 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>Asiatic Researches.</em>)<em> </em>And his facts and quotations
 from the <em>Puranas </em>give direct and conclusive evidence
 that the Aryan Hindus and other ancient nations were earlier navigators
 than the Phoenicians, who are now credited with having been the
 first seamen that appeared in the <em>post-</em>diluvian times.
 This is what is given in the <em>Journal </em>of the Asiatic Society,
 <em>III., pp.</em> 325,<em> et seq.: -</em>-
 </p><p>
 "In their distress the few nations who survived (in the war
 between Devatas and Daityas) raised their hands to Bhagavan, 'Let
 him who can deliver us . . . be our King'; using the word I'T
 (a <em>magic </em>term not understood by Wilford, evidently) which
 re-echoed through the whole country."
 </p><p>
 Then comes a violent storm, the waters of the <em>Kali </em>are
 strangely agitated, "when there appeared from the waves .
 . a man, afterwards called I'T, at the head of a numerous army,
 saying <em>abhayan, </em>no fear" . . . and scattered the
 enemy. "The King I'T," explains Wilford, "is a
 subordinate incarnation of M'rira" (<em>Mrida, </em>a form
 of Rudra, probably?) who "re-established peace and prosperity
 throughout all Sankha-dwipa, <em>through Barbaradesa, </em>Hissast'han
 and Awasthan or Arabia . . " etc., etc.
 </p><p>
 Surely, if the Hindu Puranas give a description of wars on continents
 and islands situated beyond Western Africa in the Atlantic Ocean;
 if their writers speak of <em>Barbaras </em>and other people such
 as Arabs -- they who were never known to navigate, or cross the
 <em>Kala pani </em>(the black waters of the Ocean) in the days
 of Phoenician navigation -- then their Puranas must be older than
 those Phoenicians (placed at from 2,000 to 3,000 years <strong>B.C</strong>.).
 At any rate those traditions must have been older;* as --
 </p><p>
 "In the above accounts," writes an adept, "the
 Hindus speak of this island as <em>existing </em>and in great
 power; it must, therefore, have been more than <em>eleven thousand
 years ago.</em>"
 </p><p>
 But another calculation and proof may be adduced of the great
 antiquity of these Hindu Aryans who knew of (because they had
 once dwelt in it) and described the last surviving island of Atlantis
 -- or rather of that remnant of the Eastern portion of that continent
 which had
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Says Wilford of the division of Atlantis and Bharata or India,
 confusing the two accounts and Priyavrata with Medhatithi: --
 "The division was made by Priyavrata. . . . He had ten sons,
 and it was his intention to divide the whole world. In the same
 manner Neptune divided Atlantis between his ten sons. . . . One
 of them had . . . the extremity of the Atlantis" -- which
 "is probably the old continent. . . . This Atlantis was overwhelmed
 by a flood. . . . and it seems that <em>by Atlantis we should</em>
 <em>understand the Antediluvian Earth </em>over which ten princes
 were born to rule according to the mythology of the West (and
 of the East, also) but <em>seven only </em>of them sat upon the
 throne." (<em>Vol. III. p. </em>286.) . . Some also are of
 opinion that of the seven dwipas <em>six </em>were destroyed by
 a flood (<em>Vol. VIII. p. </em>367). Wilford takes it to be "Gades
 which included Spain," but it was Plato's island -- rather.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 407 THE PUZZLES OF ANTIQUITY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 perished soon after the upheaval of the two Americas* -- the two
 Varshas of Pushkara. This may be demonstrated, moreover, on an
 astronomical calculation by an adept who criticises Wilford. For
 recalling what the Orientalist had brought forward concerning
 the Mount Ashburj "at the foot of which the sun sets,"
 where was the war between the Devatas and the Daityas,** he says:
 --
 </p><p>
 "We will consider, then, the latitude and longitude of the
 lost island, and of the remaining Mount Ashburj. It was on the
 seventh stage of the world, <em>i.e</em>., in the seventh climate
 (which is between the latitude of 24 degrees and latitude 28 degrees
 north) . . . This island, the daughter of the Ocean, is frequently
 described as lying in the West; and the sun is represented as
 setting at the foot of its mountain (Ashburj, Atlas, Teneriffe
 or Nila, no matter the name), and fighting the white Devil of
 the 'White Island.' "
 </p><p>
 Now, considering this statement from its astronomical aspect,
 and knowing that Krishna is the incarnated Sun (Vishnu), a solar
 God; and that he is said to have killed Dev-Sefid, the white giant
 -- a<em> possible</em> personification of the ancient inhabitants
 at the foot of the Atlas -- perchance Krishna may be only a representation
 of the vertical beams of the Sun? Those inhabitants (the Atlantides)
 are, we have seen, accused by Diodorus of daily <em>cursing the
 Sun, </em>and ever fighting his influence. This is an astronomical
 interpretation of course. But it will now be proved that Sankhasura,
 and Sancha dwipa, and all their history, is also geographically
 and ethnologically Plato's "Atlantis" in Hindu dress.
 </p><p>
 It was just remarked that since, in the Puranic accounts, the
 island is<em> still existing, </em>then those accounts must be
 older than the 11,000 years elapsed since Sancha dwipa, or the
 Poseidonis of Atlantis, disappeared. Is it not barely possible
 that Hindus should have known the island still earlier? Let us
 turn again to astronomical demonstrations, which make this quite
 plain if one assumes, according to the said adept, that "at
 the time when the summer tropical 'colure' passed through the
 <em>Pleiades,</em> when<em> cor-Leonis </em>would be upon the
 equator; and when Leo <em>was vertical</em> to Ceylon at sunset,
 then would <em>Taurus </em>be vertical to the island of <em>Atlantis
 at noon.</em>"
 </p><p>
 This explains, perhaps, why the Singhalese, the heirs of the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * America, the "new" world -- is thus, though not <em>much,</em>
 older; still it <em>is</em> older than Europe, the "old world."
 </p><p>
 ** If Div or Dev-Sefid's (the Taradaitya's) abode was on the <em>seventh
 stage, </em>it is because he came from Pushkara, the <em>Patala</em>
 (antipodes) of India, or from America. The latter touched the
 walls, so to say, of Atlantis, before the latter sank finally.
 The word <em>Patala, </em>meaning both the antipodal countries
 and infernal regions, thus became synonymous in ideas and attributes
 as well as in name. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 408 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Rakshasas and Giants of Lanka, and the direct descendants of <em>Singha,</em>
 or <em>Leo, </em>became connected with Sancha dwipa or Poseidonis
 (Plato's Atlantis). Only, as shown by Mackey's "<em>Sphinxiad,</em>"<em>
 </em>this must have occurred about 23,000 years ago, <em>astronomically</em>;<em>
 </em>at which time the obliquity of the ecliptic must have been
 rather more than 27 degrees, and consequently Taurus must have
 passed over "Atlantis" or "Sancha dwipa."
 And that it was so is clearly demonstrated.
 </p><p>
 "<em>The sacred bull Nandi was brought from Bharata to Sancha
 to meet</em> <em>Rishabha </em>(<em>Taurus</em>) <em>every Kalpa.
 But when those of the White Island</em> (who descended originally
 from Sveta dwipa),* <em>who had mixed with the</em> <em>Daityas
 </em>(giants)<em> of the land of iniquity, had become black with
 Sin, then</em> <em>Nandi remained for ever in the </em>"<em>White
 Island</em>"<em> </em>(or Sveta dwipa.) "<em>Those</em>
 <em>of the Fourth World</em> (race)<em> lost </em><strong>AUM</strong>"<em>
 -- </em>say the <em>Commentaries.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Asburj (or Azburj), whether the peak of Teneriffe or not, was
 a volcano, when the sinking of the "western Atala" (or
 hell) began, and those who were saved told the tale to their children.
 Plato's Atlantis perished between water below and fire above;
 the great mountain vomiting flames all the while. "The 'fire-vomiting
 Monster' survived alone out of the ruins of the unfortunate island."
 </p><p>
 Do the Greeks, accused of borrowing a Hindu fiction (Atala), and
 inventing from it another (Atlantis), stand also accused of getting
 their geographical notions and the number seven from them? (<em>Vide
 </em>in Part <strong>II</strong>. the several sections on the
 <strong>S</strong>EPTENATE in nature.)
 </p><p>
 "The famous Atlantis exists no longer, but we can hardly
 doubt that it did once," says Proclus, "for Marcellus,
 who wrote a history of Ethiopian affairs, says that such, and
 so great an island once existed, and this is evidenced by those
 who composed histories relative to the external sea. For <em>they
 relate that in this time there were seven islands in </em>the
 Atlantic sea sacred to Proserpine; and besides these, three of
 immense magnitude, sacred to Pluto . . . Jupiter . . . and Neptune.
 And, besides this, the inhabitants of the last island (Poseidonis)
 <em>preserved</em> <em>the memory of the prodigious magnitude
 </em>of the Atlantic island as related by their ancestors, and
 of its governing for many periods all the islands in the Atlantic
 sea. From this <em>isle </em>one may pass to other large
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Neither Atlantis, nor yet Sancha dwipa, was ever called "White
 Island." When tradition says that "the White Island
 became black on account of the sins of people" it only means
 the denizens of the "White Island," or Siddhapura, or
 Sveta dwipa, who descended to the Atlantis of the Third and Fourth
 races, to "inform the latter; and who, having incarnated,
 became black with sin" -- a figure of speech. All the Avatars
 of Vishnu are said to come originally from the White Island. According
 to Tibetan tradition the White Island is the only locality which
 escapes the general fate of other dwipas and can be destroyed
 by neither fire nor water, for -- it is the "eternal land."
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 409 WHAT MARCELLUS SAYS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 islands beyond, which are not far from the firm land, near which
 is the true sea."
 </p><p>
 "These seven dwipas (inaccurately rendered islands) constitute,
 according to Marcellus, the body of the famous Atlantis,"
 writes Wilford himself. . . . . This evidently shows that <em>Atlantis
 is the old continent</em>. . . . The Atlantis was destroyed after
 a violent storm (?): this is well known to the Puranics, some
 of whom assert that in consequence of this dreadful convulsion
 of nature, six of the dwipas disappeared" . . <em>. </em>(<em>xi.,
 </em>27).
 </p><p>
 Enough proofs have now been given to satisfy the greatest sceptic.
 Nevertheless, direct proofs based on exact science are also added.
 Volumes might be written, however, to no purpose for those who
 will neither see nor hear, except through the eyes and ears of
 their respective authorities.
 </p><p>
 Hence the teaching of the Roman Catholic scholiasts, namely, that
 Hermon, the mount in the land of Mizpeth -- meaning "anathema,"
 "destruction" -- is the same as Mount Armon. As a proof
 of this, Josephus is often quoted, as affirming that still in
 his own day enormous bones of giants were daily discovered on
 it. But it was the land of Balaam the prophet, whom the "Lord
 loved well"; and so mixed up are facts and personages in
 the said scholiasts' brains, that, when the Zohar explains the
 "birds" which inspired Balaam to mean "Serpents,"
 to wit, the wise men and adepts at whose school he had learnt
 the mysteries of prophecy -- the opportunity is again taken of
 showing Mount Hermon inhabited by the "winged dragons of
 Evil, whose chief is Samael" (the Jewish Satan).
 </p><p>
 "It is to those unclean spirits chained on Mount Hermon of
 the Desert, that the scapegoat of Israel, who assumed the name
 of one of them (Azaz(y)el), was sent" (<em>Spencer</em>).
 </p><p>
 We say it is not so. The Zohar has the following explanation on
 the practice of magic which is called in Hebrew <em>Nehhaschim,
 </em>or the "Serpents' Works." It says (<em>Part III.
 col. 302</em>)<em>: -</em>- "It is called <em>nehhaschim,
 </em>because the magicians (practical Kabalists) work <em>surrounded
 by</em> <em>the light of the primordial serpent, </em>which they
 perceive in heaven as a luminous zone composed of myriads of small
 stars" . . . which means simply the <em>astral light, </em>so
 called by the Martinists, by Eliphas Levi, and now by all the
 modern Occultists. (Vide Sections about.)
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE "<strong>C</strong>URSE" FROM A
 <strong>P</strong>HILOSOPHICAL POINT OF VIEW.
 </p><p>
 The foregoing teachings of the <strong>S</strong>ECRET <strong>D</strong>OCTRINE,
 supplemented by universal traditions, must now have demonstrated
 that the Brahmanas and Puranas, the Yathas and other Mazdean Scriptures,
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 410 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 down to the Egyptian, Greek, and Roman, and finally to the Jewish
 Sacred records, all have the same origin. None are meaningless
 and baseless stories, invented to entrap the unwary profane: all
 are allegories intended to convey, under a more or less fantastic
 veil, the great truths gathered in the same field of pre-historic
 tradition. Space forbids us from entering, in these two volumes,
 into further and more minute details with respect to the four
 Races which preceded our own. But before offering to the student
 the history of the psychic and spiritual evolution of the direct
 antediluvian fathers of our Fifth (Aryan) humanity, and before
 demonstrating its bearing upon all the other side branches grown
 from the same trunk, we have to elucidate a few more facts. It
 has been shown, on the evidence of the whole ancient literary
 world, and the intuitional speculations of more than one philosopher
 and scientist of the later ages, that the tenets of our Esoteric
 Doctrine are corroborated by inferential as well as by direct
 proof in almost every case. That neither the "legendary"
 giants, nor the lost continents, nor yet the evolution of the
 preceding races, are quite baseless tales. In the <em>Addenda
 </em>which close this volume, science will find itself more than
 once unable to reply; they will, it is hoped, finally dispose
 of every sceptical remark with regard to the sacred number in
 nature, and our figures in general. (Vide §§ on the
 <em>Septenaries.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Meanwhile, one task is left incomplete: that of disposing of that
 most pernicious of all the theological dogmas -- the CURSE under
 which mankind is alleged to have suffered ever since the supposed
 disobedience of Adam and Eve in the bower of Eden.
 </p><p>
 Creative powers in man were the gift of divine wisdom, not the
 result of sin. This is clearly instanced in the paradoxical behaviour
 of Jehovah, who first <em>curses </em>Adam and Eve (or Humanity)
 for the supposed committed crime, and then <em>blesses </em>his
 "chosen people" by saying "Be fruitful and multiply,
 and replenish the earth" (<em>Gen. ix. </em>1). The curse
 was not brought on mankind by the Fourth Race, for the comparatively
 sinless Third Race, the still more gigantic Antediluvians, had
 perished in the same way; hence the Deluge was no punishment,
 but simply a result of a periodical and geological law. Nor was
 the curse of <strong>K</strong>ARMA called down upon them for
 seeking <em>natural </em>union, as all the mindless animal-world
 does in its proper seasons; but, for abusing the creative power,
 for desecrating the divine gift, and wasting the life-essence
 for no purpose except bestial personal gratification. When understood,
 the third chapter of Genesis will be found to refer to the Adam
 and Eve of the closing Third and the commencing Fourth Races.
 In the beginning, conception was as easy for woman as it was for
 all animal creation. Nature had never intended that woman should
 bring forth her young ones "in sorrow." Since that period,
 however, during the </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 411 THE ANCIENT AND THE MODERN MAN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 evolution of the Fourth Race, there came enmity between its seed,
 and the "Serpent's" seed, the seed or product of <em>Karma
 </em>and divine wisdom. For the seed of woman or lust, <em>bruised
 the head </em>of the seed of <em>the fruit of</em> <em>wisdom
 and knowledge, </em>by turning the holy mystery of procreation
 into animal gratification; hence the law of Karma "bruised
 the <em>heel</em>"<em> </em>of the Atlantean race, by gradually
 changing physiologically, morally, physically, and mentally, the
 whole nature of the Fourth Race of mankind,* until, from the healthy
 King of animal creation of the Third Race, man became in the Fifth,
 our race, a helpless, scrofulous being, and has now become the
 wealthiest heir on the globe to constitutional and hereditary
 diseases, the most consciously and intelligently bestial of all
 animals!**
 </p><p>
 This is the real CURSE from the physiological standpoint, almost
 the only one touched upon in the Kabalistic esotericism. Viewed
 from this aspect, the curse is undeniable, for it is evident.
 The intellectual evolution, in its progress hand-in-hand with
 the physical, has certainly been a curse instead of a blessing
 -- a gift quickened by the "Lords of Wisdom," who have
 poured on the human <em>manas </em>the fresh dew of their own
 spirit and essence. The divine Titan has then suffered in vain;
 and one feels inclined to regret his benefaction to mankind, and
 sigh for those days so graphically depicted by AEschylus, in his
 "Prometheus Bound," when, at the close of the first
 Titanic age (the age that followed that of ethereal man, of the
 pious Kandu and Pramlocha), nascent, physical mankind, still mindless
 and (physiologically) senseless, is described as --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Seeing, they saw in vain;<br>
 Hearing, they heard not; but like shapes in dreams,<br>
 Through the long time all things at random mixed."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Our<em> Saviours, </em>the Agnishwatta and other divine "Sons
 of the Flame of Wisdom" (personified by the Greeks in Prometheus***),
 may well, in
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * How wise and grand, how far-seeing and morally beneficent are
 the laws of Manu on connubial life, when compared with the licence
 tacitly allowed to man in civilized countries. That those laws
 have been neglected for the last two millenniums does not prevent
 us from admiring their forethought. The Brahmin was a <em>grihasta,
 </em>a family man, till a certain period of his life, when, after
 begetting a son, he broke with married life and became a chaste
 Yogi. His very connubial life was regulated by his Brahmin astrologer
 in accordance with his nature. Therefore, in such countries as
 the Punjab, for instance, where the lethal influence of Mussulman,
 and later on of European, licentiousness, has hardly touched the
 orthodox Aryan castes, one still finds the finest men -- so far
 as stature and physical strength go -- on the whole globe; whereas
 the mighty men of old have found themselves replaced in the Deccan,
 and especially in Bengal, by men whose generation becomes with
 every century (and almost with every year) dwarfed and weakened.
 </p><p>
 ** Diseases and over-population are facts that can never be denied.
 </p><p>
 *** In Mrs. Anna Swanwick's volumes, "The Dramas of AEschylus,"
 it is said of "Prometheus Bound" (Vol. <strong>II</strong>.,
 pp. 146, 147), that Prometheus truly appears in it "as [[Footnote
 continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 412 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the injustice of the human heart, be left unrecognized and unthanked.
 They may, in our ignorance of the truth, be indirectly cursed
 for Pandora's gift: but to find themselves proclaimed and declared
 by the mouth of the clergy, the EVIL ONES, is too heavy a Karma
 for "Him" "who dared alone "-- when Zeus "ardently
 desired" to quench the entire human race -- to save "that
 mortal race" from perdition, or, as the suffering Titan is
 made to say: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "From sinking blasted down to Hades' gloom.<br>
 For this by the dire tortures I am bent,<br>
 Grievous to suffer, piteous to behold,<br>
 I who did mortals pity! . . . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The chorus remarking very pertinently: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Vast boon was this thou gavest unto mortals . . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Prometheus answers: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Yea, and besides 'twas I that gave them fire.<br>
 <strong>C</strong>HORUS: Have now these short-lived creatures
 flame-eyed fire? <br>
 <strong>P</strong>ROM.: Ay, and by it full many arts will learn.
 . . . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 But, with the arts, the fire received has turned into the greatest
 curse: the animal element, and <em>consciousness </em>of its possession,
 has changed periodical instinct into chronic animalism and sensuality.*
 It is this which hangs over humanity like a heavy funereal pall.
 Thus arises the responsibility of free-will; the Titanic passions
 which represent humanity in its darkest aspect; "the restless
 insatiability of the lower passions and desires, when, with self-asserting
 insolence, they bid defiance to the restraints of law."**
 </p><p>
 Prometheus having endowed man, according to Plato's "Protagoras,"
 with that "wisdom which ministers to physical well-being,"
 but the lower aspect of <em>manas </em>of the animal (<em>Kama</em>)<em>
 </em>having remained unchanged,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] the champion and benefactor
 of mankind, whose condition . . . . is depicted as weak and miserable
 in the extreme. . . . Zeus, it is said, proposed to annihilate
 these puny ephemerals, and to plant upon the earth a new race
 in their stead." We see the Lords of Being doing likewise,
 and exterminating the first product of nature and the sea, in
 the Stanzas (V, <em>et seq</em>.). . . . Prometheus <em>represents
 </em>himself as having frustrated this design, and as being consequently
 subjected, for the sake of mortals, to the most agonising pain,
 inflicted by the remorseless cruelty of Zeus. We have, thus, the
 Titan, the symbol of finite reason and free will (of intellectual
 humanity, or the higher aspect of <em>Manas</em>),<em> </em>depicted
 <em>as the sublime philanthropist, </em>while Zeus, the supreme
 deity of Hellas, is portrayed as the cruel and obdurate despot,
 a character peculiarly revolting to Athenian sentiment."
 The reason for it is explained further on. The "Supreme Deity"
 bears, in every ancient Pantheon -- including that of the Jews
 -- a <em>dual </em>character, composed of light and shadow.
 </p><p>
 * The animal world, having simple instinct to guide it, has its
 <em>seasons of procreation,</em> and the sexes become neutralized
 during the rest of the year. Therefore, the free animal knows
 sickness but once in its life -- before it dies.
 </p><p>
 ** Introduction to "<em>Prometheus Bound,</em>"<em>
 </em>p. 152. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 413 THE TRAVESTY OF PROMETHEUS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 instead of "an untainted mind, heaven's first gift"
 (AEschylus), there was created the eternal vulture of the ever
 unsatisfied desire, of regret and despair coupled with "the
 dreamlike feebleness that fetters the blind race of mortals"
 (<em>p</em>. 556), unto the day when Prometheus is released by
 his heaven-appointed deliverer, Herakles.
 </p><p>
 Now Christians -- Roman Catholics especially -- have tried to
 prophetically connect this drama with the coming of Christ. No
 greater mistake could be made. The true theosophist, the pursuer
 of divine wisdom and worshipper of ABSOLUTE perfection -- the
 unknown deity which is neither Zeus nor Jehovah -- will demur
 to such an idea. Pointing to antiquity he will prove that there
 never was an <em>original </em>sin, but only an abuse of physical
 intelligence -- the psychic being guided by the animal, and both
 putting out the light of the spiritual. He will say, "All
 ye who can read between the lines, study ancient wisdom in the
 old dramas -- the Indian and the Greek; read carefully the one
 just mentioned, one enacted on the theatres of Athens 2,400 years
 ago, namely 'Prometheus Bound' " The myth belongs to neither
 Hesiod nor AEschylus; but, as Bunsen says, it "is older than
 the Hellenes themselves," for it belongs, in truth, to the
 dawn of human consciousness. The <em>Crucified</em> Titan is the
 personified symbol of the collective Logos, the "Host,"
 and of the "Lords of Wisdom" or the HEAVENLY MAN, who
 incarnated in Humanity. Moreover, as his name <em>Pro</em>-me-<em>theus</em>,
 meaning "he who sees before him" or futurity, shows*
 -- in the arts he devised and taught to humanity, psychological
 insight was not the least. For as he complains to the daughters
 of Oceanos: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Of prophecies the various modes I fixed,<br>
 And among dreams did first discriminate<br>
 The truthful vision . . . and mortals guided<br>
 To a mysterious art. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>
 All arts to mortals from Prometheus came. . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * From [[<em>pro metis</em>]] <em>pro metis</em>, "forethought."
 "Professor Kuhn," we are told in the above-named volumes
 of "The Dramas of AEschylus," "considers the name
 of the Titan to be derived from the Sanskrit word Pramantha, the
 instrument used for kindling fire. The root<em> mand</em> or<em>
 manth</em>, implies rotatory motion, and the word <em>manthami</em>
 (used to denote the process of fire kindling) acquired the secondary
 sense of snatching away; hence we find another word of the same
 stock, <em>pramatha</em>, signifying theft." This is very
 ingenious, but perhaps not altogether correct; besides, there
 is a very prosaic element in it. No doubt in physical nature,
 the higher forms may develop from the lower ones, but it is hardly
 so in the world of thought. And as we are told that the word <em>manthami</em>
 passed into the Greek language and became the word <em>manthano,
 </em>to learn; that is to say, to appropriate knowledge; whence
 <em>prometheia, </em>fore-knowledge, fore-thought; we may find,
 in searching, a more poetical origin for the "fire-bringer"
 than that displayed in its Sanskrit origin. The <em>Svastica,
 </em>the sacred sign and the instrument for kindling <em>sacred
 </em>fire, may explain it better. "Prometheus, the fire-bringer,
 is the <em>Pramantha </em>personified," goes on the author;
 "he finds his prototype in the Aryan [[Footnote continued
 on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 414 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Leaving for a few pages the main subject, let us pause and see
 what may be the hidden meaning of this, the most ancient as it
 is the most suggestive of traditional allegories. As it relates
 directly to the early races, this will be no real digression.
 </p><p>
 The subject of AEschylus' drama (the trilogy is lost) is known
 to all cultured readers. The demi-god robs the gods (the Elohim)
 of their secret -- the mystery of the <em>creative fire. </em>For
 this sacrilegious attempt he is struck down by KRONOS* and delivered
 unto Zeus, the FATHER and creator of a mankind which he would
 wish to have blind intellectually, and animal-like; a <em>personal
 </em>deity, which will not see MAN "like one of us."
 Hence Prometheus, "the fire and light-giver," is chained
 on Mount Caucasus and condemned to suffer torture. But the triform
 Fates (Karma), whose decrees, as the Titan says, even Zeus: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "E'en he the fore-ordained cannot escape. . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 -- ordain that those sufferings will last only to that day when
 a son of Zeus --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Ay, a son bearing stronger than his sire" (787)<br>
 . . . . . . . . . . <br>
 "One of thine (Io's) own descendants it must be. ."(791)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 -- is born. This "Son" will deliver Prometheus (the
 suffering Humanity) from his own fatal gift. His name is, "He
 who has to come. . . . "
 </p><p>
 On the authority, then, of these few lines, which, like any other
 allegorical sentence, may be twisted into almost any meaning;
 namely, on the words pronounced by Prometheus and addressed to
 Io, the daughter of Inachos, persecuted by Zeus -- a whole prophecy
 is constructed by some Catholic writers. Says the crucified Titan:
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 "And, portent past belief, the speaking oaks<br>
 By which full clearly, in no riddling phrase<br>
 Wast hailed <i>as the illustrious spouse of Zeus</i> <br>
 <i>. . . . . . . . .</i> (v<i>. </i>853). <br>
 . . . . stroking thee<br>
 With <i>touch alone of unalarming hand;</i> <br>
 Then thou <i>dark Epaphos </i>shalt bear, whose name<br>
 Records his sacred gendering . . . . " (870)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This was construed by several fanatics -- des Mousseaux and de
 Mir-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] Matarisvan, a divine
 . . . . personage, closely associated with the fire god of the
 Veda, Agni. . . ." Mati, in Sanskrit, is "understanding,"
 and a synonym of MAHAT and <em>manas, </em>and must be of some
 account in the origin of the name: <em>Promati </em>is the son
 of Fohat, and has his story also.
 </p><p>
 * Kronos is "time," and thus the allegory becomes very
 suggestive. (<em>See closing</em> <em>pages of this Sub-section.</em>)
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 415 CHRIST CONNECTED WITH EPAPHOS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ville amongst others -- into a clear prophecy. Io -- "is
 the mother of God," we are told, and "dark Epaphos"
 -- Christ. But, the latter has not dethroned his father, except
 metaphorically, if one has to regard Jehovah as that "Father";
 nor has the Christian Saviour hurled <em>his</em> Father down
 into Hades. Prometheus says, in verse 930, that Zeus will be humbled
 yet; as for himself: --
 </p><blockquote>
 " . . . . such marriage he prepares<br>
 Which from his throne of power to nothingness<br>
 Shall hurl him down; so shall be all fulfilled<br>
 His father Kronos' curse . . . .<br>
 . . . . Then let him sit<br>
 Confiding in his lofty thunder-peals,<br>
 And wielding with both hands the fiery bolt;<br>
 For <i>these shall not avail, but fail he shall,</i> <br>
 <i>A fall disgraceful, </i>not to be endured . . . . " (v.
 980).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 "Dark Epaphos" was the Dionysos-Sabazius, the son of
 Zeus and of Demeter in the Sabasian Mysteries, during which the
 "father of the gods," assuming the <em>shape of a Serpent,
 </em>begot on Demeter, Dionysos, or the solar Bacchus. Io is the
 moon, and at the same time the <strong>E</strong>VE <em>of a</em>
 <em>new race, </em>and so is Demeter -- in the present case. The
 Promethean myth is a prophecy indeed; but it does not relate to
 any of the cyclic Saviours who have appeared periodically in various
 countries and among various nations, in their transitionary conditions
 of evolution. It points to the last of the mysteries of cyclic
 transformations, in the series of which mankind, having passed
 from the ethereal to the solid physical state, from spiritual
 to physiological procreation, is now carried onward on the opposite
 arc of the cycle, toward that second phase of its primitive state,
 when <em>woman knew no man, </em>and human progeny <em>was created,</em>
 <em>not begotten.</em> 
 </p><p>
 That state will return to it and to the world at large, when the
 latter shall discover and really appreciate the truths which underlie
 this vast problem of sex. It will be like "the light that
 never shone on sea or land," and has to come to men through
 the Theosophical Society. That light will lead on and up to the
 <em>true spiritual intuition. </em>Then (as expressed once in
 a letter to a theosophist), "the world <em>will have a race
 of Buddhas and</em> <em>Christs, </em>for the world will have
 discovered that individuals <em>have it in their</em> <em>own
 powers to procreate Buddha-like children -- or demons.</em>"<em>
 </em>"When that knowledge comes, all dogmatic religions,
 and with these the demons, will die out."
 </p><p>
 If we reflect upon the serial development of the allegory, and
 the character of the heroes, the mystery may be unriddled. <strong>K</strong>RONOS
 is of course "time" in its cyclic course. He swallows
 his children -- the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See, for explanation of this curse, the last page of the present
 sub-section.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 416 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>personal </em>gods of exoteric dogmas included. He has swallowed
 instead of Zeus, his <em>stone </em>idol; but the symbol has grown,
 and has only developed in human fancy as mankind was cycling down
 toward only its physical and intellectual -- not spiritual --
 perfection. When it is as far advanced in its spiritual evolution
 Kronos will be no longer deceived. Instead of the <em>stone image
 </em>he will have swallowed the anthropomorphic fiction itself.
 Because, <em>the serpent of wisdom, </em>represented in the Sabasian
 mysteries by the anthropomorphised Logos, the unity of spiritual
 and physical Powers, will have begotten in Time (Kronos) a progeny
 -- Dionysos-Bacchus or the "dark Epaphos," the "mighty
 one" -- the race that will overthrow him. Where will he be
 born? Prometheus traces him to his origin and birth-place in his
 prophecy to Io. Io is the moon-goddess of generation -- for she
 is Isis and she is Eve, the great mother.* He traces the path
 of the (racial) wanderings as plainly as words can express it.
 She has to quit Europe and go to Asia's continent, reaching there
 the highest of the mountains of Caucasus (737), the Titan telling
 her: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "When thou hast crossed the flood, limit betwixt<br>
 Two continents, fronting the burning East." (810)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 that she must travel eastward, after passing the "Kimmerian
 Bosphorus," and cross what is evidently the Volga and now
 Astrakhan on the Caspian Sea. After this she will encounter "fierce
 northern blasts" and cross thither to the land of the "Arimaspian
 host" (east of Herodotus' Scythia) to --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Pluto's gold-abounding flood. . . ."(825)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Which is rightly conjectured by Professor Newman to have meant
 the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is complained by the author of the version on, and translator
 of, "Prometheus Bound" that in this tracing of Io's
 wanderings, "no consistency with our known geography is attainable"
 (<em>p.</em> <em>191, Vol. II</em>). There may be good reason
 for it. First of all it is the journey and wandering from place
 to place of the <em>race</em> from which the "tenth,"
 or <em>Kalki </em>Avatar, so called, is to issue. This he calls
 the "Kingly race born <em>in Argos</em>"<em> </em>(888).
 But Argos has no reference here to Argos in Greece. It comes from
 <em>Arg</em> or<em> arca </em>-- the female generative power symbolised
 in the moon -- the navi-formed Argha of the mysteries, meaning
 the Queen of Heaven. Eustathius shows that, in the dialect of
 the Arg-ians, Io signified the moon; while esotericism explains
 it as the divine Androgyne, or the mystic 10; in Hebrew 10 is
 the perfect number, or Jehovah. <em>Arghya </em>in Sanskrit is
 the libation cup, the <em>navi</em>-form or boat-shaped vessel
 in which flowers and fruit are offered to the deities. <em>Arghyanath
 </em>is a title of the Maha-Chohan, meaning "the Lord of
 Libations;" and <em>Arghya Varsha -- </em>"the land
 of libations" -- is the mystery name of that region which
 extends from Kailas mountain nearly to the Schamo Desert -- from
 within which the <em>Kalki Avatar </em>is expected. The Airyana-Varsedya
 of the Zoroastrians, as a locality, is identical with it. It is
 now said to have been situated between the sea of Aral, Baltistan,
 and little Tibet; but in olden times its area was far larger,
 as it was the birth-place of <em>physical </em>humanity, of which
 Io is the mother and symbol.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 417 THE MISTAKE OF ARRIAN EXPLAINED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Ural, the Arimaspi of Herodotus being "the recognised inhabitants
 of this golden region."
 </p><p>
 And here comes, between verses 825 and 835, a puzzle to all the
 European interpreters. Says the Titan: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "To these (Arimaspi and Grypes) approach not; a far border
 land<br>
 Thou next wilt reach, where dwells a swarthy race<br>
 Near the Sun's founts, where is the AEthiop "river";
 <br>
 Along its banks proceed till thou attain<br>
 The mighty rapids, where from Bybline heights<br>
 Pure draughts of sacred water Neilos sends . . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 There Io was ordained to found a colony for herself and sons.
 Now we must see how the passage is interpreted. As Io is told
 that she has to travel eastward till she comes to the river Ethiops,
 which she is to follow till it falls into the Nile -- hence the
 perplexity. "According to the geographical theories of the
 earliest Greeks" we are informed by the author of the version
 on "Prometheus Bound" --
 </p><blockquote>
 "This condition was fulfilled by the river Indus. Arrian
 (<i>vi.</i> i.) mentions that Alexander the Great, when preparing
 to sail down the Indus (having seen crocodiles in the river Indus,
 and in no other river except the Nile . . . ), seemed to himself
 to have discovered the sources of the Nile, as though the Nile,
 rising from some place in India, and flowing through much desert
 land, and thereby losing its name Indus, next . . . flowed through
 inhabited land, being now called the Nile by the Ethiopians of
 those parts and afterwards by the Egyptians. Virgil in the 4th
 Georgic echoes the absolute error" (<i>p</i>. 197, <i>Vol.
 II</i>.).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Both Alexander and Virgil may have erred considerably in their
 geographical notions; but the prophecy of Prometheus has not so
 sinned, in the least -- not, at any rate, in its esoteric spirit.
 When a certain race is symbolised, and events pertaining to its
 history are rendered allegorically, no topographical accuracy
 ought to be expected in the itinerary traced for its personification.
 Yet it so happens, that the river "Ethiops" is certainly
 the Indus, and it is also the <em>Nil or Nila. It </em>is the
 river born on the <em>Kailas</em> (heaven) mountain, the mansion
 of the gods -- 22,000<em> </em>feet above the level of the sea.
 It was the Ethiops river -- and was so called by the Greeks, long
 before the days of Alexander, because its banks, from Attock down
 to Sind, were peopled by tribes generally referred to as the Eastern
 Ethiopians. India and Egypt were two kindred nations, and the
 Eastern Ethiopians -- the mighty builders -- have come from India,
 as is pretty well proved, it is hoped, in "<strong>I</strong>SIS
 <strong>U</strong>NVEILED." (Vol. I. p. 569-70).
 </p><p>
 Then why could not Alexander, and even the learned Virgil have
 used the word Nile or <em>Neilos </em>when speaking of the Indus,
 since it is one of its names? To this day that river is called,
 in the regions around Kala-Bagh,<em> nil </em>(blue), and <em>Nilah,
 </em>"the blue river." The water here is of such dark
 blue colour that the name given to it from time immemorial led
 to</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 418 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 a small town on its banks being called by the same name. It exists
 to this day. Evidently Arrian -- who wrote far later than the
 day of Alexander, and who was ignorant of the old name of the
 Indus -- has unconsciously slandered the Greek conqueror. Nor
 are our modern historians much wiser, in judging as they do. For
 they often make the most sweeping declarations on mere appearances,
 as much as their ancient colleagues ever did in days of old, when
 no Encyclopaedias were yet ready for them.
 </p><p>
 The race of IO, "the cow-horned maid" is then simply
 the first pioneer race of the AEthiopians brought by her from
 the Indus to the Nile (which received its name in memory of the
 mother river of the colonists from India*). For does not Prometheus
 say to Io** that the sacred Neilos (the god, not the river) --
 </p><p>
 . . . "He to the land, <em>three-cornered, </em>thee shall
 guide," -- namely, to the <em>Delta, </em>where her sons
 are foreordained to found -- . . . . . "that far-off colony
 . . ." (<em>v</em>. 830 <em>et seq</em>.).
 </p><p>
 It is there that a new race (the Egyptians) will begin, and a
 "female race" (873) which, "fifth in descent"
 from dark Epaphos --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Fifty in number shall return to Argos."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 . . . . . . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Then one of the fifty virgins will fail through love and shall
 -- . . .
 </p><blockquote>
 A kingly race in Argos bear<br>
 . . . . . . . .<br>
 But from this seed shall dauntless heroes spring,<br>
 Bow-famous, who shall free me from these ills."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 When this hero shall arise, the Titan does not reveal; for as
 he remarks: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "This, to set forth at large needs lengthy speech."
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Alexander, who was better acquainted with Attock than with India
 (where he never went) could not have failed to hear the Indus
 near its very sources called Nil and <em>Nilah. </em>Even if a
 mistake, it is thus easily accounted for.
 </p><p>
 ** That Io is identical allegorically with Isis and the moon is
 shown by her being "cow-horned." The allegory undeniably
 reached Greece from India, where Vach -- "the melodious cow"
 (Rig-Veda) "from whom mankind was produced" (Bhagavata
 Purana) is shown in the Aitareya Brahmana as pursued by her father
 Brahma, who was moved by an illicit passion, and changed her into
 a deer. Hence Io, refusing to yield to Jupiter's passion, becomes
 "horned." The cow was in every country the symbol of
 the passive generative power of nature, Isis, Vach, Venus -- the
 mother of the prolific god of love, Cupid, but, at the same time,
 that of the <em>Logos </em>whose symbol became with the Egyptians
 and the Indians -- the bull -- as testified to by Apis and the
 Hindu bulls in the most ancient temples. In esoteric philosophy
 the cow is the symbol of creative nature, and the Bull (her calf)
 the spirit which vivifies her, or "the Holy Spirit,"
 as Mr. Kenealy shows. Hence the symbol of the horns. These were
 sacred also with the Jews, who placed near the altar horns of
 Shittim wood, by seizing which a criminal ensured his safety.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 419 WAS AESCHYLUS INITIATED? </h6>
 
 <p>
 But "Argos" is <em>Arghya Varsha, </em>the land of libation
 of the old Hierophants, whence the deliverer of Humanity will
 appear, a name which became ages later that of its neighbour,
 India -- the Arya-varta of old.
 </p><p>
 That the subject formed part of the Sabasian mysteries is made
 known by several ancient writers: by Cicero (<em>in Tuscul. Quaest.
 I, ii. No.</em> 20)<em> </em>and by Clemens Alexandrinus (<em>Strom</em>.
 I,<em> ii., oper. tom</em>. 1<em>, </em>p. 467 -- <em>Ed.</em>
 <em>Potter</em>'<em>s</em>).<em> </em>The latter writers are the
 only ones who attribute the fact that AEschylus was charged by
 the Athenians with sacrilege and condemned to be stoned to death,
 to its true cause. They say that having been himself uninitiated,
 AEschylus had profaned the Mysteries by exposing them in his trilogies
 on a public stage.* But he would have incurred the same condemnation
 had he been initiated -- which must have been the case, as otherwise
 he must, like Socrates, have had a <em>daimon </em>to reveal to
 him the secret and sacred allegorical drama of initiation. At
 all events, it is not the "father of the Greek tragedy"
 who invented the prophecy of Prometheus; for he only repeated
 in dramatic form that which was revealed by the priests during
 the MYSTERIA of the Sabasia.** The latter, however, is one of
 the oldest sacred festivals, whose origin is to this day unknown
 to history. Mythologists connect it through Mithras (the Sun,
 called Sabasius on some old monuments) with Jupiter and Bacchus.
 But it was never the property of the Greeks, but dates from days
 immemorial.
 </p><p>
 The translators of the drama wonder how AEschylus could become
 guilty of such "discrepancy between the character of Zeus
 as portrayed in the 'Prometheus Bound' and that depicted in the
 remaining dramas." (<em>Mrs. A. Swanwick.</em>)<em> </em>This
 is just because AEschylus, like Shakespeare, was and will ever
 remain the intellectual "Sphinx" of the ages. Between
 Zeus, the abstract deity of Grecian thought, and the Olympic Zeus,
 there was an abyss. The latter represented during the mysteries
 no higher a principle than the lower aspect of human physical
 intelligence -- <em>Manas </em>wedded to <em>Kama</em>; Prometheus
 -- its divine aspect merging into and aspiring to Buddhi -- the
 divine Soul. Zeus was the human soul and nothing more, whenever
 shown yielding to his lower passions, -- the <em>jealous </em>God,
 revengeful and cruel in its egotism or <strong>I</strong>-AM-NESS.
 Hence, Zeus is represented as a serpent -- the intellectual tempter
 of man -- which, nevertheless, begets in the course of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Herodotus and Pausanias supposed that the cause of the condemnation
 was that AEschylus, adopting the theogony of the Egyptians, made
 Diana, the daughter of Ceres, and not of Latona. (See <em>AElian
 Var. Hist. I, v. c</em>. xviii., <em>tom</em>. <em>1, p</em>.
 <em>433 Edition</em> <em>Gronov.</em>)<em> </em>But AEschyIus
 <em>was </em>initiated.
 </p><p>
 **<em> Sabasia </em>was a periodical festival with mysteries enacted
 in honour of some gods, a variant on the Mithraic Mysteries. The
 whole evolution of the races was performed in them.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 420 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 cyclic evolution the "Man-Saviour," the solar Bacchus
 or "Dionysos," <em>more than a man.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Dionysos is one with Osiris, with Krishna, and with Buddha (the
 heavenly wise), and with the coming (tenth) Avatar, the glorified
 Spiritual <em>Christos, </em>who will deliver the suffering <em>Christos
 </em>(mankind, or Prometheus, on its trial). This, say Brahminical
 and Buddhistic legends, echoed by the Zoroastrian and now by the
 Christian teachings (the latter only occasionally), will happen
 at the end of <em>Kaliyuga. </em>It is only after the appearance
 of Kalki-Avatar, or Sosiosh, that man will be born from woman
 without sin. Then will Brahma, the Hindu deity; Ahura-Mazda (Ormazd),
 the Zoroastrian; Zeus, the Greco-Olympian Don Juan; Jehovah, the
 jealous, repenting, cruel, tribal God of the Israelites, and all
 their likes in the universal Pantheon of human fancy -- vanish
 and disappear in thin air. And along with these will vanish their
 shadows, <em>the dark aspects </em>of all those deities, ever
 represented as their "twin brothers" and creatures,
 in exoteric legend, <em>their own reflection on </em>earth --
 in esoteric philosophy. The Ahrimans and Typhons, the Samaels
 and Satans, must be all dethroned on that day, when every dark
 evil passion will be subdued.
 </p><p>
 There is one eternal Law in nature, one that always tends to adjust
 contraries and to produce final harmony. It is owing to this law
 of spiritual development superseding the physical and purely intellectual,
 that mankind will become freed from its false gods, and find itself
 finally -<em>- </em><strong>SELF</strong><em>-</em><strong>REDEEMED</strong><em>.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 In its final revelation, the old myth of Prometheus -- his<em>
 proto- </em>and <em>anti-</em>types being found in every ancient
 theogony -- stands in each of them at the very origin of physical
 evil, because at the threshold of human physical life. <strong>K</strong>RONOS
 is "Time," whose first law is that the order of the
 successive and harmonious phases in the process of evolution during
 cyclic development should be strictly preserved -- under the severe
 penalty of abnormal growth with all its ensuing results. It was
 not in the programme of natural development that man -- higher
 animal though he may be -- should become at once -- intellectually,
 spiritually, and psychically -- the demi-god he is on earth, while
 his physical frame remains weaker and more helpless and ephemeral
 than that of almost any huge mammal. The contrast is too grotesque
 and violent; the tabernacle much too unworthy of its indwelling
 god. The gift of Prometheus thus became a CURSE -- though <em>foreknown
 </em>and <em>foreseen </em>by the HOST personified in that personage,
 as his name well shows.* It is in this that rests, at one and
 the same time,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Vide supra, </em>a foot-note concerning the etymology of
 [[<em>prometis</em>]] <em>prometis</em> or<em> forethought. </em>Prometheus
 confesses it in the drama when saying: -- [[Footnote continued
 on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 421 ONE OF THE FUNCTIONS OF ZEUS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 its sin and its redemption. For the Host that incarnated in a
 portion of humanity, though led to it by Karma or <em>Nemesis,
 </em>preferred free-will to passive slavery, intellectual self-conscious
 pain and even torture "while myriad time shall flow"
 -- to inane, imbecile, instinctual beatitude. Knowing such an
 incarnation was premature and not in the programme of nature,
 the heavenly host, "Prometheus," still sacrificed itself
 to benefit thereby, at least, one portion of mankind.* But while
 saving man from mental darkness, they inflicted upon him the tortures
 of the self-consciousness of his responsibility -- the result
 of his free will -- besides every ill to which mortal man and
 flesh are heir to. This torture Prometheus accepted for himself,
 since the Host became henceforward blended with the tabernacle
 prepared for them, which was still unachieved at that period of
 formation.
 </p><p>
 Spiritual evolution being incapable of keeping pace with the physical,
 once its homogeneity was broken by the admixture, the gift thus
 became the chief cause, if not the sole origin of <em>Evil.</em>**
 The allegory which shows<strong> K</strong>RONOS cursing Zeus
 for dethroning him (in the primitive "golden" age of
 Saturn, when all men were demi-gods), and for creating a physical
 race of men weak and helpless in comparison; and then as delivering
 to his (Zeus') revenge the culprit, who despoiled the gods of
 their prerogative of creation and who thereby raised man to their
 level, intellectually and spiritually -- is highly philosophical.
 In the case of Prometheus, Zeus represents the Host of the primeval
 progenitors, of the PITAR, the "Fathers" who created
 man senseless
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]]
 </p><blockquote>
 "Oh! holy Ether, swiftly-winged gales . . . .<br>
 Behold what I, a god, from gods endure<br>
 . . . . . . . . .<br>
 And yet what say I? <i>Clearly I foreknew</i> <br>
 All that must happen . . . .<br>
 . . . . The Destined it behoves,<br>
 As best I may, to bear, for well I wot<br>
 How incontestable the strength of Fate . . . . (88-105)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 "Fate" stands here for <strong>K</strong>ARMA, or <em>Nemesis.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 * Mankind is obviously divided into god-informed men and lower
 human creatures. The intellectual difference between the Aryan
 and other civilized nations and such savages as the South Sea
 Islanders, is inexplicable on any other grounds. No amount of
 culture, nor generations of training amid civilization, could
 raise such human specimens as the Bushmen, the Veddhas of Ceylon,
 and some African tribes, to the same intellectual level as the
 Aryans, the Semites, and the Turanians so called. The "sacred
 spark" is missing in them and it is they who are the only
 <em>inferior </em>races on the globe, now happily -- owing to
 the wise adjustment of nature which ever works in that direction
 -- fast dying out. Verily mankind is "of one blood,"
 <em>but not of the same</em> <em>essence. </em>We are the hot-house,
 artificially quickened plants in nature, having in us a spark,
 which in them is latent.
 </p><p>
 ** The philosophical view of Indian metaphysics places the Root
 of Evil in the differentiation of the Homogeneous into the Heterogeneous,
 of the unit into plurality.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 422 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and without any mind; while the divine Titan stands for the Spiritual
 creators, the <em>devas </em>who "fell" into generation.
 The former are spiritually lower, but physically stronger, than
 the "Prometheans": therefore, the latter are shown conquered.
 "The lower Host, whose work the Titan spoiled and thus defeated
 the plans of Zeus," was on this earth in its own sphere and
 plane of action; whereas, the superior Host was an exile from
 Heaven, who had got entangled in the meshes of matter. They (the
 inferior "Host") were masters of all the Cosmic and
 lower titanic forces; the higher Titan possessed only the intellectual
 and spiritual fire. This drama of the struggle of Prometheus with
 the Olympic tyrant and despot, sensual Zeus, one sees enacted
 daily within our actual mankind: the lower passions chain the
 higher aspirations to the rock of matter, to generate in many
 a case the vulture of sorrow, pain, and repentance. In every such
 case one sees once more --
 </p><blockquote>
 "A god . . . in fetters, anguish fraught;<br>
 The foe of Zeus, in hatred held by all. . . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 A god, bereft even of that supreme consolation of Prometheus,
 who suffered in self-sacrifice --
 </p><blockquote>
 "For that to men he bare too fond a mind. . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 as the divine Titan is moved by altruism, but the mortal man by
 Selfishness and Egoism in every instance.
 </p><p>
 The modern Prometheus has now become <em>Epi-metheus, </em>"he
 who sees only after the event"; because the universal philanthropy
 of the former has long ago degenerated into selfishness and self-adoration.
 Man will rebecome the<em> free </em>Titan of old, but not before
 cyclic evolution has re-established the broken harmony between
 the two natures -- the terrestrial and the divine; after which
 he becomes impermeable to the lower titanic forces, invulnerable
 in his personality, and immortal in his individuality, which cannot
 happen before every animal element is eliminated from his nature.
 When man understands that "<em>Deus non fecit mortem</em>"
 (<em>Sap. I., </em>13), but that man has created it himself, he
 will re-become the Prometheus before his Fall.
 </p><p>
 For the full symbolism of Prometheus and the origin of this mythos
 in Greece, the reader is referred to Part <strong>II</strong>.
 of this Volume, chapter "A Second Key to Prometheus,"
 etc. In the said Part -- a kind of supplement to the present portion
 -- every additional information is given upon those tenets that
 will be the most controverted and questioned. This work is so
 heterodox, when confronted with the acknowledged standards of
 theology and modern science, that no proof which tends to show
 that these standards often usurp an illegal authority should be
 neglected. </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-24.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>