<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 52 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA II.<br>
 NATURE UNAIDED FAILS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 -------
 </p><blockquote>
 ยง (5) After enormous periods the Earth creates monsters.
 (6) The "Creators" are displeased. (7) They dry the
 Earth. (8) The forms are destroyed by them. (9) The first great
 tides. (10) The beginning of incrustation.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 ---------------------
 </p><p>
 5. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>W</strong>HEEL WHIRLED FOR THIRTY
 CRORES (<em>of years, or </em>300,000,000<em>*</em>)<em>. </em><strong>I</strong>T
 CONSTRUCTED RUPAS (<em>forms</em>)<em>. </em><strong>S</strong>OFT
 STONES, THAT HARDENED (<em>minerals</em>)<em>; </em>HARD PLANTS,
 THAT SOFTENED (<em>vegetation</em>)<em>. </em><strong>V</strong>ISIBLE
 FROM INVISIBLE, INSECTS AND SMALL LIVES (<em>sarisripa, swapada</em>)<em>.
 </em><strong>S</strong>HE<em> </em>(<em>the Earth</em>)<em> </em>SHOOK
 THEM OFF HER BACK, WHENEVER THEY OVERRAN THE MOTHER (<em>a</em>).
 <strong>A</strong>FTER THIRTY CRORES OF YEARS, SHE TURNED ROUND.
 <strong>S</strong>HE LAID ON HER BACK; ON HER SIDE. . . . . <strong>S</strong>HE
 WOULD CALL NO SONS OF <strong>H</strong>EAVEN, SHE WOULD ASK NO
 SONS<em> </em>OF <strong>W</strong>ISDOM. <strong>S</strong>HE
 CREATED FROM HER OWN BOSOM. SHE EVOLVED WATER-MEN TERRIBLE AND
 BAD (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) This relates to an inclination of the axis -- of
 which there were several -- to a consequent deluge and chaos on
 Earth (having, however, no reference to primeval chaos), in which
 monsters, half-human, half-animal, were generated. We find it
 mentioned in the "Book of the Dead," and also in the
 Chaldean account of creation, on the Cutha Tablets, however mutilated.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * 300 million years, or Three Occult Ages. The Rig Veda has the
 same division. In the<em> </em>"<em>Physician</em>'<em>s
 Hymn,</em>"<em> </em>(X 97 1) it is said that "the plants
 came into being <em>three ages </em>(Triyugam) before the gods"
 on our Earth (See "Chronology of the Brahmins" at the
 end of this Stanza).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 53 THE MONSTERS OF CHAOS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 It is not even allegory. Here we have <em>facts, </em>that are
 found repeated in the account of <em>Pymander, </em>as well as
 in the Chaldean tablets of creation. The verses may almost be
 checked by the Cosmogony, as given by Berosus, which has been
 disfigured out of recognition by Eusebius, but some of the features
 of which may yet be found in fragments left by ancient Greek authors
 -- Apollodorus, Alexander Polyhistor, etc., etc. "The water-men
 terrible and bad," who were the production of physical nature
 alone, a result of the "evolutionary impulse" and the
 first attempt to create <em>man</em> the "crown," and
 the aim and goal of all animal life on Earth -- are shown to be
 failures in our Stanzas. Do we not find the same in the Berosian
 Cosmogony, denounced with such vehemence as the culmination of
 heathen absurdity? And yet who of the Evolutionists can say that
 things in the beginning have not come to pass as they are described?
 That, as maintained in the Puranas, the Egyptian and Chaldean
 fragments, and even in Genesis, there have not been two, and even
 more, "creations" before the last formation of the Globe;
 which, changing its geological and atmospheric conditions, changed
 also its flora, its fauna, and its men? This claim agrees not
 only with every ancient Cosmogony, but also with modern science,
 and even, to a certain degree, with the theory of evolution, as
 may be demonstrated in a few words.
 </p><p>
 There is no "dark creation," no "Evil Dragon"
 conquered by a Sun-God, in the earliest World-Cosmogonies. Even
 with the Akkads, the great Deep (the Watery Abyss, or <strong>S</strong>PACE)
 was the birthplace and abode of Ea, Wisdom, the incognizable infinite
 Deity. But with the Semites and the later Chaldeans, the fathomless
 Deep of Wisdom becomes gross matter, sinful Substance, and Ea
 is changed into Tiamat, the dragon slain by Merodach, or Satan,
 in the astral waves.
 </p><p>
 In the Hindu Puranas, Brahma, the creator, is seen recommencing
 <em>de</em> <em>novo </em>several creations after as many failures;
 and two great creations are mentioned,* the Padma and the Varaha,
 the present, when the Earth was lifted out of the water by Brahma,
 in the shape of a boar, or "Varaha Avatar." Creation
 is shown as a sport, an amusement (Lila) of the creative god.
 The Zohar speaks of primordial worlds, which perished as soon
 as they came into existence. And the same is said in Midraish,
 Rabbi Abahu explaining distinctly (in Bereschith Rabba, Parscha
 <strong>IX</strong>.) that "the Holy One" had successively
 created and de-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * These two must not be confused with the seven creations or divisions
 in each Kalpa (See Book I. "<em>The Seven Creations</em>")<em>.
 </em>The <em>primary</em> and <em>secondary </em>creations are
 here meant. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 54 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 stroyed sundry worlds, before he succeeded in the present one.
 This does not relate only to other worlds in space, but to a mystery
 of our own globe contained in the allegory about the "kings
 of Edom." For the words, "This one pleases me,"
 are repeated in Genesis i. 31, though in disfigured terms, as
 usual. The Chaldean fragments of Cosmogony on the Cuneiform inscriptions,
 and elsewhere, show two distinct creations of animals and men,
 the first being destroyed, as it was a failure. The Cosmogonical
 tablets prove that this our actual creation was preceded by others
 (See "Hibbert Lectures," p. 390); and as shown by the
 author of "The Qabbalah," in the Zohar, Siphrah Dzeniouta,
 in Jovah Rabbah, 128<i>a</i>, etc., etc. The Kabala states the
 same.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) Oannes (or Dagon, the Chaldean "Man-fish")
 divides his Cosmogony and Genesis into two portions. First the
 abyss of waters and darkness, wherein resided most hideous beings
 --
 </p><p>
 -men with wings, four and two-faced men, human beings with two
 heads, with the legs and horns of a goat (our "goat-men,")*
 hippocentaurs, bulls with the heads of men, and dogs with tails
 of fishes. In short, combinations of various animals and men,
 of fishes, reptiles and other monstrous animals assuming each
 other's shapes and countenances. The feminine element they resided
 in, is personified by Thalatth -- the Sea, or "Water"
 -- which was finally conquered by Belus, the male principle. And
 Polyhistor says: "Belus came and cut the woman asunder, and
 of one half of her he formed the Earth, and of the other half
 the heavens, and at the same time he destroyed the animals within
 her." As pertinently remarked by I. Myer, "with the
 Akkadians each object and power of Nature had its Zi, Spirit.
 The Akkadians formed their deities into triads, usually males
 (sexless, rather?); the Semites also had triadic deities, but
 introduced sex" (p. 246) -- or phallicism. With the Aryans
 and the earliest Akkadians all things are emanations <em>through,</em>
 not<em> by, </em>a creator or logos. With the Semites everything
 is <em>begotten.</em> 
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Whence the identity of the ideas? The Chinese have the same
 traditions. According to the commentator Kwoh P'oh, in the work
 called <em>Shan-Hai-King, </em>"Wonders by Sea and Land,"
 a work which was written by the historiographer Chung Ku from
 engravings on nine urns made by the Emperor Yu, (B.C. 2255), an
 interview is mentioned with men <em>having two distinct faces
 on their heads, </em>before and behind, monsters with bodies of
 goats and human faces, etc. Gould, in his "<em>Mythical Monsters,</em>"<em>
 </em>p. 27, giving the names of some authors on Natural History,
 mentions <em>Shan-Hai-King. Ac</em>cording to Kwoh P'oh (A.D.
 276-324) this work was compiled three thousand years before his
 time, or at seven dynasties distance. Yang Sun of the Ming Dynasty
 (commencing A.D. 1368) states that it was compiled by Kung Chia
 and Chung Ku (as stated above). Chung Ku at the time of the last
 emperor of the Hia dynasty, B.C. 1818, fearing that the emperor
 might destroy the books treating of the ancient time, carried
 them in his flight to Yin. (See "<em>Mythical Monsters,</em>"<em>
 </em>by C. Gould, p. 27.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 55 UNAIDED PHYSICAL NATURE FAILS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 6. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>W</strong>ATER-MEN TERRIBLE AND
 BAD SHE HERSELF CREATED. <strong>F</strong>ROM THE REMAINS OF
 OTHERS (<em>from the mineral, vegetable and animal</em> <em>remains</em>)<em>
 </em>FROM THE FIRST, SECOND, AND THIRD (<em>Rounds</em>)<em> </em>SHE
 FORMED THEM. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>D</strong>HYANI CAME
 AND LOOKED. . . . . <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>D</strong>HYANI
 FROM THE BRIGHT <strong>F</strong>ATHER-<strong>M</strong>OTHER,
 FROM THE WHITE (<em>Solar-lunar</em>)<em> </em>REGIONS THEY CAME,*
 FROM THE ABODES OF THE <strong>I</strong>MMORTAL-<strong>M</strong>ORTALS
 (<i>a</i>).
 </p><p>
 (<i>a</i>) The explanations given in our Stanzas are far more
 clear than that which the legend of creation from the <em>Cutha
 </em>tablet would give, even were it complete. What is preserved
 on it, however, corroborates them. For, in the tablet, "the
 Lord of Angels" destroys the men in the abyss, when "there
 were not left the carcases and waste" after they were slaughtered.
 After which they, the Great Gods, create men with the bodies of
 birds of the desert, human beings, "seven kings, brothers
 of the same family," etc., which is a reference to the locomotive
 qualities of the primary ethereal bodies of men, which could fly
 as well as they could walk,** but who "were destroyed"
 because they were not "<em>perfect,</em>"<em> i.e.</em>,
 they "were sexless, like the Kings of Edom."
 </p><p>
 Weeded of metaphors and allegories, what will science say to this
 idea of a primordial creation of species? It will object to the
 "Angels" and "Spirits" having anything to
 do therewith: but if it is nature and the physical law of evolution
 that are the creators of all there is now on Earth, why could
 there be "no such abyss" when the globe was covered
 with waters, in which numbers of monstrous beings were generated?
 Is it the "human beings" and animals with human heads
 and double faces, which are a point of the objection? But if man
 is only a higher animal and has evolved from the brute species
 by an infinite series of transformations, why could not the "missing
 links" have had human heads attached to the bodies of animals,
 or, being two-headed, have heads of beasts and <em>vice versa,
 </em>in Nature's early efforts? Are we not shown during the geological
 periods, in the ages of the reptiles and the mammalia, lizards
 with birds' wings, and serpents' heads on animal bodies.*** And,
 arguing from the standpoint of science, does not even our modern
 human race occasionally furnish us with monster-specimens: two-headed
 children, animal bodies with human heads, dog-headed babies, etc.,
 etc.? And this proves that, if nature will still play such
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Gods and planetary Spirits, especially the Ribhus. "The
 three Ribhus" who yet become "thrice seven in number"
 of their gifts.
 </p><p>
 ** Remember the "winged Races" of Plato; and the <em>Popol-Vuh
 </em>accounts of the first human race, which could walk, fly and
 see objects, however distant.
 </p><p>
 *** <em>See </em>"<em>Mythical Monsters,</em>"<em> </em>by
 Charles Gould. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 56 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 freaks now that she has settled for ages into the order of her
 evolutionary work, monsters, like those described by Berosus,
 were a possibility in her opening programme; which possibility
 may even have existed once upon a time as a law, before she sorted
 out her species and began regular work upon them; which indeed
 now admits of definite proof by the bare fact of "<strong>R</strong>EVERSION,"
 as science puts it.
 </p><p>
 This is what the doctrine teaches and demonstrates by numerous
 proofs. But we shall not wait for the approval of either dogmatic
 theology or materialistic science, but proceed with the Stanzas.
 Let these speak for themselves, with the help of the light thrown
 by the Commentaries and their explanations; the scientific aspect
 of these questions will be considered later on.
 </p><p>
 Thus physical nature, when left to herself in the creation of
 animal and man, is shown to have failed. She can produce the first
 two and the lower animal kingdoms, but when it comes to the turn
 of man, spiritual, independent and intelligent powers are required
 for his creation, besides the "coats of skin" and the
 "Breath of animal Life." The human Monads of preceding
 Rounds need something higher than purely physical materials to
 build their personalities with, under the penalty of remaining
 even below any "Frankenstein" animal.*
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In the first volume of the lately published "<em>Introduction
 a l</em>'<em>atude des Races Humaines,</em>"<em> </em>by
 M. de Quatrefages, there is proof that since the post-tertiary
 period and even before that time -- since many Races were already
 scattered during that age on the face of the Earth -- man has
 not altered one iota in his physical structure. And if, surrounded
 for ages by a fauna that altered from one period or cycle to another,
 which died out, which was reborn in other forms -- so that now
 there does not exist one single animal on Earth, large or small,
 contemporary with the man of that period -- if, then, every animal
 has been transformed save man himself, this fact goes to prove
 not only his antiquity, but that he is a <em>distinct Kingdom.
 </em>Why should he alone have escaped transformation? Because,
 says de Quatrefages, the weapon used by him, in his struggle with
 nature and the ever-changing geological conditions and elements,
 was "his <em>psychic force,</em> <em>not his physical strength
 or body</em>," as in the case of animals. Give man only that
 dose of intelligence and reason with which other mammalia are
 endowed, and with his present bodily organization he will show
 himself the most helpless of creatures of Earth. And as everything
 goes to prove that the <i>human </i><em>organism with all its
 characteristics, peculiarities and idiosyncrasies existed already
 on our Globe in those far distant geological periods when there
 was not yet one single specimen of the now-existing forms of mammalia</em>,
 what is the unavoidable conclusion? Why this: Since all the human
 races are of one and the same species, it follows that this species
 is the <em>most ancient of all </em>the now-living mammalia. Therefore
 it is the most stable and persevering of all, and was already
 as fully developed as it is now when all the other mammalia now
 known had not made even their first approach to appearance on
 this Earth. Such is the opinion of the great French Naturalist,
 who gives thereby a terrible blow to Darwinism. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 57 THE "DOUBLE DRAGON."</h6>
 
 <p>
 7. <strong>D</strong>ISPLEASED THEY WERE. <strong>O</strong>UR
 FLESH IS NOT THERE (<em>they said</em>)<em>.</em><strong> T</strong>HIS
 IS NO FIT RUPA FOR OUR BROTHERS OF THE FIFTH. <strong>N</strong>O
 DWELLINGS FOR THE LIVES.* <strong>P</strong>URE WATERS, NOT TURBID,
 THEY MUST DRINK (<em>a</em>). <strong>L</strong>ET US DRY THEM
 (<em>the waters</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>Says the Catechism (Commentaries): --
 </p><p>
 "<em>It is from the material Worlds that descend they, who
 fashion physical man at the new Manvantaras. They are inferior
 Lha </em>(<em>Spirits</em>)<em>, possessed of a dual body </em>(an
 astral within an ethereal form). <em>They are the fashioners and
 creators of our body of illusion</em>." . . . .
 </p><p>
 "<em>Into the forms projected by the Lha </em>(Pitris)<em>
 the two letters** </em>(the Monad, called also 'the Double Dragon')
 <em>descend from the spheres of expectation.*** But they are like
 a roof with no walls, nor pillars to rest upon</em>." . .
 . .
 </p><p>
 "<em>Man needs four flames and three fires to become one
 on Earth, and he requires the essence of the forty-nine fires****
 to be perfect. It is those who have deserted the Superior Spheres,
 the Gods of Will,***** who complete the Manu of illusion. For
 the </em>'<em>Double Dragon</em>'<em> has no hold upon the mere
 form. It is like the breeze where there is no tree or branch to
 receive and harbour it. It cannot affect the form where there
 is no agent of transmission </em>(Manas, "Mind") <em>and
 the form knows it not.</em>"
 </p><p>
 "<em>In the highest worlds, the three are one,****** on Earth
 </em>(<em>at first</em>)<em> the one becomes two. They are like
 the two </em>(<em>side</em>)<em> lines of a triangle that has
 lost its bottom line -- which is the third fire.</em>"<em>
 </em>(Catechism Book <b>III</b>., sec. 9.)
 </p><p>
 Now this requires some explanation before proceeding any further.
 To do so especially for the benefit of our Aryan Hindu brethren
 --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Monads of the <em>presentments </em>of men of the <em>Third
 </em>Round, the huge Ape-like forms.
 </p><p>
 ** In the esoteric system the seven principles in man are represented
 by seven letters. The first two are <em>more</em> sacred than
 the four letters of the Tetragrammaton.
 </p><p>
 *** The intermediate spheres, wherein the Monads, which have not
 reached Nirvana, are said to slumber in unconscious inactivity
 between the Manvantaras.
 </p><p>
 **** Explained elsewhere. The "Three Fires," Pavaka,
 Pavamana, and Suchi, who had forty-five sons, who, with their
 three fathers and their Father Agni, constitute the 49 fires.
 Pavamana (fire produced by friction) is the parent of the <em>fire</em>
 <em>of the Asuras; </em>Suchi (Solar fire) is the parent of the
 fire of the gods; and Pavaka (electric fire) is the father of
 the fire of the <em>Pitris </em>(See<em> Vayu Purana</em>). But
 this is an explanation on the material and the terrestrial plane.
 The flames are evanescent and only periodical; the fires -- eternal
 in their triple unity. They correspond to the <em>four </em>lower,
 and the <em>three </em>higher human principles.
 </p><p>
 ***** The <em>Suras, </em>who become later the A-Suras.
 </p><p>
 ****** Atma, Buddhi and Manas. In Devachan the higher element
 of the Manas is needed to make it a state of perception and consciousness
 for the disembodied <em>Monad</em>.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 58 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 whose esoteric interpretations may differ from our own -- we shall
 have to explain to them the foregoing by certain passages in their
 own exoteric books, namely, the Puranas. In the allegories of
 the latter, Brahma, who is collectively the creative Force of
 the Universe, is said to be "at the beginning of the Yugas
 (cycles) . . . . <em>Possessed of the desire and of the power
 to create, and, impelled by the potencies of what is to be created,
 </em>again and again does he, at the outset of a Kalpa, put forth
 a similar creation," (see <em>Vishnu Purana, </em>Book I.
 ch. V., closing Sloka. Also "<em>Manava Dharma Shastra</em>"
 I. 30.) It is now proposed to examine the exoteric account in
 the Vishnu Purana, and see how much it may agree or disagree with
 our occult version.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong>C</strong>REATION OF <strong>D</strong>IVINE <strong>B</strong>EINGS
 IN THE <strong>E</strong>XOTERIC <strong>A</strong>CCOUNTS.
 </p><p>
 In the <em>Vishnu Purana </em>-- which is certainly the earliest
 of all the scriptures of that name -- we find, as in all the others,
 Brahma assuming as the male God, for purposes of creation, "<em>four
 bodies invested by three qualities.</em>"<em>* </em>It is
 said: "In this manner, Maitreya, <em>Jyotsna </em>(dawn),
 <em>Ratri </em>(night)<em>, Ahan </em>(day), and <em>Sandhya </em>(evening
 twilight) are the four bodies of Brahma" . . (p. 81, Vol.
 I., Wilson's translation). As Parasara explains it, when Brahma
 wants to create the world anew and construct progeny <em>through
 his will</em>, in the fourfold condition (or the four orders of
 beings) termed gods (Dhyan Chohans), Demons** (<em>i.e.</em>,
 more material Devas), Progenitors (Pitris) and men, "he collects
 Yoga-like (Yuyuje) his mind."
 </p><p>
 Strange to say, he begins by creating DEMONS, who thus take precedence
 over the angels or gods. This is no incongruity, nor is it due
 to inconsistency, but has, like all the rest, a profound esoteric
 meaning, quite clear to one free from Christian theological prejudice.
 He who bears in mind that the principle <strong>M</strong>AHAT,
 or Intellect, the "Universal Mind" (literally "the
 great"), which esoteric philosophy explains as the "manifested
 Omniscience" -- the "first product" of Pradhana
 (primordial matter) as Vishnu Purana says, but the first Cosmic
 aspect of Parabrahm or the esoteric SAT, the Universal Soul,***
 as Occultism
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This has in <em>esotericism </em>a direct bearing upon the seven
 principles of the manifested Brahma, or universe, in the same
 order as in man. Exoterically, it is only four principles.
 </p><p>
 ** <em>Demons </em>is a very loose word to use, as it applies
 to a great number of inferior -- <em>i.e., </em>more material
 -- Spirits, or minor Gods, who are so termed because they "war"
 with the higher ones; but they are no devils.
 </p><p>
 *** The same order of principles in man: -- <em>Atma</em> (Spirit)<em>,
 Buddhi </em>(Soul), its vehicle, as Matter is the <em>Vahan </em>of
 Spirit, and <em>Manas </em>(mind), the third, or the fifth microcosmically.
 On the <em>plane of personality, Manas </em>is the first.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 59 THE BODIES OF BRAHMA.</h6>
 
 <p>
 teaches -- is at the root of <strong>S</strong>ELF-Consciousness,
 will understand the reason why. The so-called "Demons"
 -- who are (esoterically) the Self-asserting and (intellectually)
 active Principle -- are the <em>positive poles of creation, </em>so
 to say; hence, the first produced. This is in brief the process
 as narrated allegorically in the Puranas.
 </p><p>
 "Having concentrated his mind into itself and the quality
 of darkness pervading Brahma's assumed body, the Asuras, issuing
 from his thigh, were first produced; after which, abandoning this
 body, it was transformed into NIGHT." (See Part <b>II.</b>,
 ยง<em> </em>"<em>The Fallen Angels.</em>")
 </p><p>
 Two important points are involved herein: -- (<em>a</em>) Primarily
 in the <em>Rig-Veda, </em>the "Asuras" are shown as
 <em>spiritual divine beings; </em>their etymology is derived from
 <em>asu </em>(breath), the "Breath of God," and they
 mean the same as the Supreme Spirit or the Zoroastrian <em>Ahura.
 </em>It is later on, for purposes of theology and dogma, that
 they are shown issuing from Brahma's thigh, and that their name
 began to be derived from a privative, and <em>sura, </em>god (solar
 deities), or <em>not-a-god, </em>and that they became the enemies
 of the gods. Every ancient theogony without exception -- from
 the Aryan and the Egyptian down to that of Hesiod -- places, in
 the order of Cosmogonical evolution, Night before the Day; even<em>
 Genesis, </em>where "darkness is upon the face of the deep"
 before "the <em>first day.</em>"<em> </em>The reason
 for this is that every Cosmogony -- except in the Secret Doctrine
 -- begins by the "Secondary Creation" so-called: to
 wit, the <em>manifested </em>Universe, the Genesis of which has
 to open by a marked differentiation between the eternal Light
 of <em>Primary </em>Creation, whose mystery must remain for ever
 "Darkness" to the prying finite conception and intellect
 of the profane, and the Secondary Evolution of manifested visible
 nature. The Veda contains the whole philosophy of that division
 without having ever been correctly explained by our Orientalists,
 because it has <em>never been understood </em>by them.
 </p><p>
 Continuing to create, Brahma assumes another form, that of the
 Day, and creates from his breath the gods, who are endowed with
 the quality of goodness (passivity)*. In his next body the quality
 of great passivity prevailed, which is also (negative) goodness,
 and from the side of that personage issued the Pitris, the progenitors
 of men, because, as the text explains, "Brahma thought of
 himself (during the process) as the father of the world."**
 This is <em>Kriya-sakti -- </em>the mysterious <em>Yoga</em> power
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Thus, says the Commentary, the saying "by day the gods
 are most powerful, and by night the demons," is purely allegorical.
 </p><p>
 ** This <em>thinking of oneself </em>as this, that, or the other,
 is the chief factor in the production of every kind of psychic
 or even physical phenomena. The words "whosoever shall say
 to this mountain be thou removed and cast into the sea, and <em>shall
 not doubt </em>. . . . that thing will come to pass," are
 no vain words. Only the word "faith" ought to be translated
 by WILL. Faith without Will is like a wind-mill without <em>wind</em>
 -- barren of results.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 60 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 explained elsewhere. This body of Brahma when cast off became
 the <em>Sandhya </em>(evening twilight), the interval between
 day and night.
 </p><p>
 Finally Brahma assumed his last form pervaded by the <em>quality
 of foulness, </em>"and from this MEN, in whom foulness and
 passion predominate, were produced." This body when cast
 off became the dawn, or morning twilight -- the twilight of Humanity.
 Here Brahma stands esoterically for the <em>Pitris. </em>He is
 collectively the Pitar, "father."
 </p><p>
 The true esoteric meaning of this allegory must now be explained.
 Brahma here symbolizes personally the collective creators of the
 World and Men -- the universe with all its numberless productions
 of things movable and (seemingly) immovable.* He is collectively
 the Prajapatis, the Lords of Being; and the four bodies typify
 the four classes of creative powers or Dhyan Chohans, described
 in the Commentary directly following Stanza <b>VII</b>. in Book
 I. The whole philosophy of the so-called "Creation"
 of the good and evil in this world and of the whole cycle of Manvantaric
 results therefrom, hangs on the correct comprehension of these
 Four bodies of Brahma.
 </p><p>
 The reader will now be prepared to understand the real, the esoteric
 significance of what follows. Moreover there is an important point
 to be cleared up. Christian theology having arbitrarily settled
 and agreed that Satan with his Fallen Angels belonged to the earliest
 creation, Satan being the first-created, the wisest and most beautiful
 of God's Archangels, the word was given, the key-note struck.
 Henceforth all the <em>pagan </em>scriptures were made to yield
 the same meaning, and all were shown to be demoniacal, and it
 <em>was </em>and<em> is </em>claimed that <em>truth and fact </em>belong
 to, and commence only with, Christianity. Even the Orientalists
 and Mythologists, some of them no Christians at all but "infidels,"
 or men of science, entered unconsciously to themselves, and by
 the mere force of association of ideas and habit, into the theological
 groove. Purely Brahmanical considerations, based on greed of power
 and ambition, allowed the masses to remain in ignorance of great
 truths; and the same causes led the Initiates among the early
 Christians to remain silent, while those who had never known the
 truth disfigured the order of things, judging of the hierarchy
 of "Angels" by their exoteric form. Thus as the <em>Asuras
 </em>had become the rebellious inferior gods fighting the higher
 ones in popular creeds, so the highest archangel, in truth the
 Agathodaemon, the eldest benevolent Logos, became with theology
 the "Adversary" or <em>Satan. </em>But is this warranted
 by the correct interpretation of any old Scripture? The answer
 is, <em>most certainly not. </em>As the Mazdean Scriptures of
 the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The same idea is found in the first four chapters of <em>Genesis,
 </em>with their "Lord" and "God," which are
 the <em>Elohim</em> and the Androgynous <em>Eloha</em>.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 61 WHAT THE GNOSTICS SAY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>Zend-Avesta, </em>the<em> Vendidad </em>and others correct
 and expose the later cunning shuffling of the gods in the Hindu
 Pantheon, and restore through <strong>A</strong>HURA the <em>Asuras
 </em>to their legitimate place in theogony, so the recent discoveries
 of the Chaldean tablets vindicate the good name of the first divine
 Emanations. This is easily proved. Christian Angelology is directly
 and solely derived from that of the Pharisees, who brought their
 tenets from Babylonia. The Sadducees, the real guardians of the
 Laws of Moses, knew not of, and rejected, any angels, opposing
 even the immortality of the human <em>Soul </em>(not impersonal
 Spirit). In the Bible the only "Angels" spoken of are
 the "Sons of God" mentioned in Genesis vi. (who are
 now regarded as the <em>Nephilim, </em>the<em> </em>Fallen Angels),
 and several angels in human form, the "Messengers" of
 the Jewish God, whose own rank needs a closer analysis than heretofore
 given. (<em>Vide Supra, </em>Stanza I., sub-sections 2, <em>3,
 et seq., </em>where it is shown that the early Akkadians called
 <i>Ea</i>, Wisdom, that which was disfigured by the later Chaldees
 and Semites into <em>Tismat, </em>Tisalat and the Thallath of
 Berosus, the female Sea Dragon, now Satan.) Truly -- "How
 art thou fallen (by the hand of man), O bright star and son of
 the morning"!
 </p><p>
 Now what do the Babylonian accounts of "Creation," as
 found on the Assyrian fragments of tiles, tell us; those very
 accounts upon which the Pharisees built their angelology? But
 compare Mr. G. Smith's "<em>Assyrian Discoveries,</em>"<em>
 </em>p. 398, and his "<em>Chaldean Account of Genesis,</em>"<em>
 </em>p. 107. The "<em>Tablet with the story of the Seven
 Wicked Gods or Spirits,</em>"<em> </em>has the following
 account -- we print the important passages in italics: --
 </p><blockquote>
 1. In the <em>first days </em>the evil Gods,<br>
 2. the<em> angels, who were in rebellion, </em>who<em> in the
 lower part of heaven</em> <br>
 3<em>. had been created,</em> <br>
 4. they caused their evil work<br>
 5. devising with wicked heads . . . . etc.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Thus we are shown, as plainly as can be, on a fragment which remained
 unbroken, so that there can be no dubious reading, that the "rebellious
 angels" had been created in the <em>lower part of heaven,
 i.e., </em>that they belonged and do belong to a <em>material
 plane of evolution, </em>although as it is not the plane of which
 we are made cognizant through our senses, it remains generally
 invisible to us, and is thus regarded as subjective. Were the
 Gnostics so wrong, after this, in affirming that this our visible
 world, and especially the Earth, had been created by <em>lower
 </em>angels, the inferior Elohim, of which, as they taught, the
 God of Israel was one. These Gnostics were nearer in time to the
 records of the Archaic Secret Doctrine, and therefore ought to
 be allowed to have known better than non-initiated Christians,
 who took upon themselves, hundreds of years</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 62 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 later, to remodel and <em>correct </em>what was said. But let
 us see what the same Tablet says further on: --
 </p><blockquote>
 7. There were seven of them (the wicked gods) . . . . (then follows
 the description of these, the fourth being a "serpent,"
 the phallic symbol of the <em>fourth </em>Race in human Evolution).
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 15. The seven of them, messengers of the God Anu, their king.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Now Anu belongs to the Chaldean trinity, and is identical with
 Sin, the "Moon," in one aspect. And the Moon in the
 Hebrew Kabala is the Argha of the seed of all material life, and
 is still more closely connected, kabalistically, with Jehovah,
 who is double-sexed as Anu is. They are both represented in Esotericism
 and viewed from a dual aspect: male or spiritual, female or material,
 or Spirit and Matter, the two antagonistic principles. Hence the
 "Messengers of Anu," (who is Sin, the "Moon,")
 are shown, in verses 28 to 41, as being finally overpowered by
 the same Sin with the help of Bel (the Sun) and Ishtar (Venus).
 This is regarded as a contradiction by the Assyriologists, but
 is simply <em>metaphysics </em>in the esoteric teaching.
 </p><p>
 There is more than one interpretation, for there are seven keys
 to the mystery of the Fall. Moreover there are two "Falls"
 in Theology: the rebellion of the Archangels and their "Fall,"
 and the "Fall" of Adam and Eve. Thus the lower as well
 as the higher Hierarchies are charged with a supposed crime. The
 word "supposed" is the true and correct term, for in
 both cases it is founded on misconception. Both are considered
 in Occultism as Karmic effects, and both belong to the law of
 Evolution: intellectual and spiritual on the one hand, physical
 and psychic on the other. The "Fall" is a universal
 allegory. It sets forth at one end of the ladder of Evolution
 the "rebellion," <em>i.e., </em>the action of differentiating
 intellection or consciousness on its various planes, seeking union
 with matter; and at the other, the lower end, the rebellion of
 matter against Spirit, or of action against spiritual inertia.
 And here lies the germ of an error which has had such disastrous
 effects on the intelligence of civilized societies for over 1,800
 years. In the original allegory it is matter -- hence the more
 material angels -- which was regarded as the conqueror of Spirit,
 or the Archangels who "fell" on this plane. "They
 of the <em>flaming sword </em>(or animal passions) had put to
 flight the Spirits of Darkness." Yet it is the latter who
 fought for the supremacy of the conscious and divine spirituality
 on Earth and failed, succumbing to the power of matter. But in
 theological dogma we see the reverse. It is Michael, "who
 is like unto God," the representative of Jehovah, who is
 the leader of the celestial hosts -- as Lucifer, in Milton's fancy,
 is of the infernal hosts -- who has the best of Satan. It is true
 that the nature of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 63 WHO ARE THE "FLAMES"?</h6>
 
 <p>
 Michael depends upon that of his Creator and Master. Who the latter
 is, one may find out by carefully studying the allegory of the
 "War in Heaven" with the astronomical key. As shown
 by Bentley, the "War of the Titans against the gods"
 in Hesiod, and also the war of the Asuras (or the Tarakamaya)
 against the devas in Puranic legend, are identical in all save
 the names. The aspects of the stars show (Bentley taking the year
 945 <b>B.C</b>. as the nearest date for such conjunction) that
 "all the planets, except Saturn, were on the same side of
 the heavens as the Sun and Moon," and hence were his opponents.
 And yet it is Saturn, or the Jewish "Moon-god," who
 is shown as prevailing, both by Hesiod and Moses, neither of whom
 was understood. Thus it was that the real meaning became distorted.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA II. -- Continued. </h4>
 
 <p>
 8. <strong>T</strong>HE FLAMES CAME. <strong>T</strong>HE FIRES
 WITH THE SPARKS; THE NIGHT FIRES AND THE DAY FIRES (<em>a</em>).
 <strong>T</strong>HEY DRIED OUT THE TURBID DARK WATERS. <strong>W</strong>ITH
 THEIR HEAT THEY QUENCHED THEM. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>L</strong>HAS
 (<em>Spirits</em>)<em> </em>OF THE HIGH; <strong>T</strong>HE
 LHAMAYIN (<em>those</em>)<em> </em>OF BELOW, CAME (<em>b</em>)<em>.</em><strong>
 T</strong>HEY SLEW THE FORMS, WHICH WERE TWO- AND FOUR-FACED.
 <strong>T</strong>HEY FOUGHT THE GOAT-MEN, AND THE DOG-HEADED
 MEN, AND THE MEN WITH FISHES' BODIES.
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The "Flames" are a Hierarchy of Spirits
 parallel to, if not identical with, the "burning" fiery
 <em>Saraph </em>(Seraphim) mentioned by Isaiah (vi. 2-6), those
 who attend, according to Hebrew Theogony, "the Throne of
 the Almighty." Melha is the Lord of the "Flames."
 When he appears on Earth, he assumes the personality of a Buddha,
 says a popular legend. He is one of the most ancient and revered
 <em>Lhas, a </em>Buddhist St. Michael.
 </p><p>
 (<i>b</i>) The word "Below" must not be taken to mean
 infernal regions, but simply a spiritual, or rather ethereal,
 Being of a lower grade, because nearer to the Earth, or one step
 higher than our terrestrial sphere; while the Lhas are Spirits
 of the highest Spheres -- whence the name of the capital of Tibet,
 <em>Lha-ssa.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Besides a statement of a purely physical nature and belonging
 to the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 64 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 evolution of life on Earth, there may be another allegorical meaning
 attached to this Sloka, or indeed, as is taught, several. The
 FLAMES, or "Fires," represent Spirit, or the male element,
 and "Water," matter, or the opposite element. And here
 again we find, in the action of the Spirit slaying the purely
 material form, a reference to the eternal struggle, on the physical
 and psychic planes, between Spirit and Matter, besides a scientific
 cosmic fact. For, as said in the next verse: --
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 9. <strong>M</strong>OTHER-WATER, THE GREAT SEA WEPT. <strong>S</strong>HE
 AROSE, SHE DISAPPEARED IN THE <strong>M</strong>OON, WHICH HAD
 LIFTED HER, WHICH HAD GIVEN HER BIRTH (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>Now what can this mean? Is it not an evident
 reference to tidal action in the early stage of the history of
 our planet in its fourth Round? Modern research has been busy
 of late in its speculations on the Palaeozoic high-tides. Mr.
 Darwin's theory was that not less than 52,000,000 years ago --
 and probably much more -- the Moon originated from the Earth's
 plastic mass. Starting from the point where research was left
 by Helmholtz, Ferrel, Sir William Thomson and others, he retraced
 the course of tidal retardation of the earth's rotary motions
 far back into the very night of time, and placed the Moon during
 the infancy of our planet at only "a fraction of its present
 distance." In short, his theory was that it is the Moon which
 separated from the Earth. The tidal elevation concurring with
 the swing of the globular mass -- centrifugal tendency being then
 nearly equal to gravity -- the latter was overcome, and the tidally
 elevated mass could thus separate completely from the Earth.*
 </p><p>
 The Occult teaching is the reverse of this. The Moon is far older
 than the Earth; and, as explained in Book I., it is the latter
 which owes its being to the former, however astronomy and geology
 may explain the fact. Hence, the tides and the attraction to the
 Moon, as shown by the liquid portion of the Globe ever striving
 to raise itself towards its parent. This is the meaning of the
 sentence that "the Mother-Water arose and disappeared in
 the Moon, which had lifted her, which had given her birth."
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * But see the difficulties suggested later, in the works of various
 geologists, against this theory. Compare Sir R. S. Bull's article
 in "<em>Nature</em>"<em> </em>(Dec. 1, 1881), and also
 what the American geologists say.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 65 DIVINE WILL BECOMES EROS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 10. <strong>W</strong>HEN THEY (<em>the Rupas</em>)<em> </em>WERE
 DESTROYED, <strong>M</strong>OTHER-EARTH REMAINED BARE,* SHE ASKED
 TO BE DRIED (<em>a</em>).**
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The time for its incrustation had arrived. The waters
 had separated and the process was started. It was the beginning
 of a new life. This is what one key divulges to us. Another key
 teaches the origin of Water, its admixture with Fire (liquid fire
 it calls it),*** and enters upon an alchemical description of
 the progeny of the two -- solid matter such as minerals and earths.
 From the "Waters of Space," the progeny of the male
 Spirit-Fire and the female (gaseous) Water has become the Oceanic
 expanse on Earth. Varuna is dragged down from the infinite Space,
 to reign as Neptune over the finite Seas. As always, the popular
 fancy is found to be based on a strictly scientific foundation.
 </p><p>
 Water is the symbol of the female element everywhere; <i>mater</i>,
 from which the letter M, is derived pictorially from [[diagram]]
 a water hieroglyph. It is the universal matrix or the "Great
 Deep." Venus, the great Mother-Virgin, issues forth from
 the Sea-wave, and Cupid or <em>Eros is </em>her son. But Venus
 is the later mythological variant of <em>Gaia </em>(or<em> Gaea</em>)<em>,
 </em>the Earth, which, in its higher aspect is Nature (<em>Prakriti</em>)<em>,
 </em>and metaphysically Aditi, and even Mulaprakriti, the root
 of Prakriti or its noumenon.
 </p><p>
 Hence Cupid or Love in his primitive sense is Eros, the Divine
 Will, or <em>Desire of manifesting itself through visible creation.
 </em>Thence Fohat, the prototype of Eros, becomes on Earth the
 great power "Life-electricity," or the Spirit of "Life-giving."
 Let us remember the Greek Theogony and enter into the spirit of
 its philosophy. We are taught by the Greeks (See "<em>Iliad</em>"<em>
 </em>IV., 201, 246) that all things, gods included, owe their
 being to the Ocean and his wife Tethys, the latter being Gaea,
 the Earth or Nature. But who is <em>Ocean? </em>Ocean is the immeasurable
 SPACE (Spirit in Chaos), which is the Deity (<em>see </em>Book
 I.); and Tethys is not the Earth, but primordial matter in the
 process of formation. In our case it is no longer Aditi-Gaea who
 begets <em>Ouranos </em>or Varuna, the chief Aditya among the
 seven planetary gods, but Prakriti, materialised and localised.
 The Moon, masculine in its theogonic character, is,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The goddess who gave birth to these primordial monsters, in
 the account of Berosus, was Thallath, in Greek <em>Thalassa, </em>"the
 Sea."
 </p><p>
 ** See, for comparison, the account of creation by Berosus (<em>Alexander
 Polyhistor</em>)<em> </em>and the hideous beings born from the
 two-fold principle (Earth and Water) in the Abyss of primordial
 creation: Neras (Centaurs, men with the limbs of horses and human
 bodies), and Kimnaras (men with the heads of horses) created by
 Brahma in the commencement of the Kalpa.
 </p><p>
 *** See Commentary following Sloka 18.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 66 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 in its cosmic aspect only, the female generative principle, as
 the Sun is the male emblem thereof. Water is the progeny of the
 Moon, an androgyne deity with every nation.
 </p><p>
 Evolution proceeds on the laws of analogy in Kosmos as in the
 formation of the smallest globe. Thus the above, applying to the
 <em>modus operandi </em>at the time when the Universe was appearing,
 applies also in the case of our Earth's formation.
 </p><p>
 This Stanza opens by speaking of thirty crores, 30,000,000, of
 years. We may be asked -- What could the ancients know of the
 duration of geological periods, when no modern scientist or mathematician
 is able to calculate their duration with anything like approximate
 accuracy? Whether they had or had not better means (and it is
 maintained that they had them in their Zodiacs), still the chronology
 of the ancient Brahmins shall now be given as faithfully as possible.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong><a name="chronology">T</a></strong>HE <strong>C</strong>HRONOLOGY
 OF THE <strong>B</strong>RAHMINS.
 </p><p>
 No greater riddle exists in science, no problem is more hopelessly
 insoluble, than the question: How old -- even approximately --
 are the Sun and Moon, the Earth and Man? What does modern science
 know of the duration of the ages of the World, or even of the
 length of geological periods?
 </p><p>
 Nothing; <em>absolutely nothing.</em> 
 </p><p>
 If one turns to science for chronological information, one is
 told by those who are straightforward and truthful, as for instance
 Mr. Pengelly, the eminent geologist, "We do not know."*
 One will learn that, so far, no trustworthy numerical estimate
 of the ages of the world and man could be made, and that both
 geology and anthropology are at sea. Yet when a student of esoteric
 philosophy presumes to bring forward the teachings of Occult Science,
 he is at once sat upon. Why should this be so, since, when reduced
 to their own physical methods, the greatest scientists have failed
 to arrive even at an approximate agreement?
 </p><p>
 It is true that science can hardly be blamed for it. Indeed, in
 the Cimmerian darkness of the prehistoric ages, the explorers
 are lost in a labyrinth, whose great corridors are doorless, allowing
 no visible exit into the Archaic past. Lost in the maze of their
 own conflicting speculations, rejecting, as they have always done,
 the evidence of Eastern tradition, without any clue, or one single
 certain milestone to guide them, what can geologists or anthropologists
 do but pick up the slender
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * For a similar admission see Prof. Lefevre's <em>Philosophy,
 </em>p. 481.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 67 THE RACE THAT NEVER DIES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 thread of Ariadne where they first perceive it, and then proceed
 at perfect random? Therefore we are first told that the farthest
 date to which documentary record extends is now generally regarded
 by Anthropology as but "the earliest distinctly visible point
 of the pre-historic period<em>.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Encyclopaedia
 Britannica.</em>)
 </p><p>
 At the same time it is confessed that "beyond that period
 stretches back a vast indefinite series of prehistoric ages."
 (<em>Ibid.</em>)
 </p><p>
 It is with those specified "Ages" that we shall begin.
 They are "prehistoric" to the naked eye of matter only.
 To the spiritual eagle eye of the seer and the prophet of every
 race, Ariadne's thread stretches beyond that "historic period"
 without break or flaw, surely and steadily, into the very night
 of time; and the hand which holds it is too mighty to drop it,
 or even let it break. Records exist, although they may be rejected
 as fanciful by the profane; though many of them are tacitly accepted
 by philosophers and men of great learning, and meet with an unvarying
 refusal only from the official and collective body of <em>orthodox
 </em>science. And since the latter refuses to give us even an
 approximate idea of the duration of the geological ages -- save
 in a few conflicting and contradictory hypotheses -- let us see
 what Aryan philosophy can teach us.
 </p><p>
 Such computations as are given in Manu and the Puranas -- save
 trifling and most evidently <em>intentional </em>exaggerations
 -- are, as already stated, almost identical with those taught
 in esoteric philosophy. This may be seen by comparing the two
 in any Hindu calendar of recognised orthodoxy.
 </p><p>
 The best and most complete of all such calendars, at present,
 as vouched for by the learned Brahmins of Southern India, is the
 already mentioned Tamil calendar called the "Tirukkanda Panchanga,"
 compiled, as we are told, from, and in full accordance with, secret
 fragments of Asuramaya's data. As Asuramaya is said to have been
 the greatest astronomer, so he is whispered to have also been
 the most powerful "Sorcerer" of the "<strong>W</strong>HITE<strong>
 I</strong>SLAND, which had become <strong>B</strong>LACK with
 sin," <em>i.e., </em>of the islands of Atlantis.
 </p><p>
 The "White Island" is a symbolical name. Asuramaya is
 said to have lived (see the tradition of Jhana-bhaskara) in <em>Romaka-pura
 </em>in the West: because the name is an allusion to the land
 and cradle of the "Sweat-born" of the Third Race. That
 land or continent had disappeared ages before Asuramaya lived,
 since he was an Atlantean; but he was a direct descendant of the
 <em>Wise Race, the Race that never dies. </em>Many are the legends
 concerning this hero, the pupil of Surya (the Sun-God) himself,
 as the Indian accounts allege. It matters little whether he lived
 on one or another island, but the question is to prove that he
 was no myth, as Dr. Weber and others would make him. The</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 68 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 fact of "<em>Romaka-pura </em>in the West" being named
 as the birth-place of this hero of the archaic ages, is the more
 interesting because it is so very suggestive of the esoteric teaching
 about the "Sweat-born" Races, the men born from the
 <em>pores of their parents. </em>"<strong>R</strong>OMAKUPAS"
 means "hair-pores" in Sanskrit. In <em>Mahabharata XII.
 </em>10,308, a people named Raumyas are said to have been created
 from the pores of Virabhadara, the terrible giant, who destroyed
 Daksha's sacrifice. Other tribes and people are also represented
 as born in this way. All these are references to the later Second
 and the earlier Third Root Races.
 </p><p>
 The following figures are from the calendar just referred to;
 a footnote marks the points of disagreement with the figures of
 the Arya Samaj school: --
 </p><blockquote>
 I. From the beginning of cosmic evolution,* up<br>
 to the Hindu year <em>Tarana </em>(or 1887) ....................
 1,955,884,687 years.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 II. The (astral) mineral, vegetable and animal<br>
 kingdoms up to Man, have taken to evolve** ........ 300,000,000
 years.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 III. Time, from the first appearance of<br>
 "Humanity" (on planetary chain)..........................1,664,500,987
 years.***
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The esoteric doctrine says that this "cosmic evolution"
 refers only to our solar system; while exoteric Hinduism makes
 the figures refer, if we do not mistake, to the whole Universal
 System.
 </p><p>
 ** Another point of disagreement. Occultism says: "The astral
 prototypes of the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms up to
 man have taken that time (300 million years) to evolve, re-forming
 out of the cast-off materials of the preceding Round, which, though
 very dense and physical in their own cycle, are relatively ethereal
 as compared with the materiality of our present middle Round.
 At the expiration of these 300 million years, Nature, on the way
 to the physical and material, down the arc of descent, begins
 with mankind and works downwards, hardening or materialising forms
 as it proceeds. Thus the fossils found in strata, to which an
 antiquity, not of eighteen, but of many hundreds of millions of
 years, must be ascribed, belong in reality to forms of the preceding
 Round, which, while living, were far more ethereal than physical,
 as <em>we</em> <em>know the physical. </em>That we perceive and
 disinter them as tangible forms, is due to the process of materialization
 or crystallization referred to, which took place subsequently,
 at the beginning of the Fourth Round, and reached its maximum
 after the appearance of man, proceeding parallel with his physical
 evolution. This alone illustrates the fact that the degree of
 materiality of the Earth changes <em>pari passu </em>with that
 of its inhabitants. And thus man now finds, as tangible fossils,
 what were once the (to his present senses) ethereal forms of the
 lower kingdoms. The above Brahmanical figures refer to evolution
 beginning on Globe A, and in the First Round. In this Volume we
 speak only of this, the Fourth Round."
 </p><p>
 *** This difference and the change of cyphers in the last three
 triplets of figures, the writer cannot undertake to account for.
 According to every calculation, once the three hundred millions
 are subtracted, the figures ought to stand, 1,655,884,687. But
 they are given as stated in the Tamil calendar above-named and
 as they were translated. The school of the late Pandit Dayanand
 Saraswati, founder of the Arya Samaj, gives a date of 1,960,852,987.
 See the "Arya Magazine" of Lahore, the cover of which
 bears the words: "Aryan era 1,960,852,987."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 69 THE VARIOUS PRALAYAS.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 IV. The number that elapsed since the "<em>Vaivasvata Manvantara</em>"<em>*
 -- </em>or the <i>human</i> period --<br>
 up to the year 1887, is just ......................... 18,618,728
 years.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 V. The full period of one <em>Manvantara </em>is ..... 308,448,000
 years.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 VI. 14 "Manvantaras" <em>plus</em> the period of one
 <em>Satya Yuga </em>make ONE DAY OF <strong>B</strong>RAHMA, or
 <br>
 complete Manvantara and make ................. 4,320,000,000 years.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 Therefore a <em>Maha-Yuga </em>consists of ............. 4,320,000
 years.**
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The year 1887 is from the commencement of<br>
 Kali-Yuga .....................................................
 4,989 years.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 To make this still clearer in its details, the following computations
 by Rao Bahadur P. Sreenivas Row, are given from the "<em>Theosophist</em>"
 of<em> </em>November, 1885.
 </p><blockquote>
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 - - - - Mortal years.<br>
 360 days of mortals make a year ...........................................
 1<br>
 Krita Yuga contains .................................................
 1,728,000<br>
 Treta Yuga contains .................................................
 1,296,000<br>
 Dwapara Yuga contains ..............................................
 864,000<br>
 Kali Yuga contains ......................................................
 432,000<br>
 The total of the said four Yugas constitute a<br>
 Maha Yuga ...............................................................
 4,320,000<br>
 Seventy-one of such Maha-Yugas form the<br>
 period of the reign of one Manu .......................... 306,720,000
 <br>
 The reign of 14 Manus embraces the duration<br>
 of 994 Maha-Yugas, which is equal to .............. 4,294,080,000
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <strong>V</strong>AIVASVATA Manu is the one human being -- some
 versions add to him the seven Rishis -- who in the <em>Matsya
 </em>Avatar allegory is saved from the Deluge in a boat, like
 Noah in the Ark. Therefore, this <em>Vaivasvata Manvantara </em>would
 be the "post-Diluvian" period. This, however, does not
 refer to the later "Atlantean" or Noah's deluge, nor
 to the Cosmic <em>Deluge </em>or<em> Pralaya </em>of obscuration,
 which preceded our Round, but to the appearance of mankind in
 the latter Round. There is a great difference made, however, between
 the "<em>Naimitika,</em>"<em> </em>occasional or incidental,
 "<em>Prakritika</em>," elemental, "<em>Atyantika,</em>"<em>
 </em>the absolute, and "<em>Nitya,</em>"<em> </em>the
 perpetual Pralaya; the latter being described as "Brahma's
 contingent recoalescence of the Universe at the end of Brahma's
 <strong>D</strong>AY." The question was raised by a learned
 Brahmin Theosophist: "Whether there is such a thing as <em>Cosmic
 </em>Pralaya; because, otherwise, the <em>Logos </em>(Krishna)
 would have to be reborn, and he is <em>Aja</em> (unborn)."
 We cannot see why. The <em>Logos </em>is said to be born only
 metaphorically, as the Sun is born daily, or rather a beam of
 that Sun is born in the morning and is said to die when it disappears,
 whereas it is simply reabsorbed into the parent essence. Cosmic
 <em>Pralaya </em>is for things visible, not for the <em>Arupa</em>,
 formless, world. The Cosmic or Universal <em>Pralaya</em> comes
 only at the end of one hundred years of Brahma; when the Universal
 dissolution is said to take place. Then the <em>Avyaya, </em>say
 the exoteric scriptures, the eternal life symbolized by Vishnu,
 assuming the character of Rudra, the <em>Destroyer, </em>enters
 into the <em>Seven</em> Rays of the Sun and drinks up all the
 waters of the Universe. "Thus fed, the seven solar Rays dilate
 to <em>seven Suns </em>and set fire to the whole Cosmos. . . .
 ."
 </p><p>
 ** Since a Maha-Yuga is the 1,000th part of a day of Brahma.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 70 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 Add <em>Sandhis, i.e., </em>intervals between the reign of each
 Manu, which amount<br>
 to six Maha-Yugas, equal to ...................................................................................................
 25,920,000
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The total of these reigns and interregnums of 14 Manus, is 1,000
 Maha-Yugas, <br>
 which constitute a Kalpa, <em>i.e.</em>, one day of Brahma ............................................................
 4,320,000,000
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 As Brahma's Night is of equal duration, one Day and Night of Brahma
 would contain .... 8,640,000,000
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 360 of such days and nights make one year of Brahma make .......................................
 3,110,400,000,000
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 100 such years constitute the whole period of Brahma's age, <em>i.e.</em>,
 Maha-Kalpa ...... 311,040,000,000,000
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 These are the exoteric figures accepted throughout India, and
 they dovetail pretty nearly with those of the Secret works. The
 latter, moreover, amplify them by a division into a number of
 esoteric cycles, never mentioned in Brahmanical popular writings
 -- one of which, the division of the Yugas into racial cycles,
 is given elsewhere as an instance. The rest, in their details,
 have of course never been made public. They are, nevertheless,
 known to every "<em>Twice-born</em>"<em> </em>(Dwija,
 or Initiated) Brahmin, and the Puranas contain references to some
 of them in veiled terms, which no matter-of-fact Orientalist has
 yet endeavoured to make out, nor could he if he would.
 </p><p>
 These sacred astronomical cycles are of immense antiquity, and
 most of them pertain, as stated, to the calculations of Narada
 and Asuramaya. The latter has the reputation of a giant and a
 sorcerer. But the antediluvian giants (the Gibborim of the Bible)
 were not all bad or Sorcerers, as Christian Theology, which sees
 in every Occultist a servant of the Evil one, would have it; nor
 were they worse than many of "the faithful sons of the Church."
 A Torquemada and a Catherine de Medicis certainly did more harm
 in their day and in the name of their Master than any Atlantean
 giant or demigod of antiquity ever did; whether his name was Cyclops,
 or Medusa, or yet the Orphic Titan, the <em>anguipedal </em>monster
 known as Ephialtes. There were <em>good </em>"giants"
 in days of old just as there are <em>bad</em> "pigmies"
 now; and the Rakshasas and Yakshas of Lanka are no worse than
 our modern dynamiters, and certain Christian and civilised generals
 during modern wars. Nor are they myths. "He who would laugh
 at Briareus and Orion ought to abstain from going to, or even
 talking of, Karnac or Stonehenge," remarks somewhere a modern
 writer.
 </p><p>
 As the Brahmanical figures given above are approximately the basic
 calculations of our esoteric system, the reader is requested to
 carefully keep them in mind.
 </p><p>
 In the "<em>Encyclopaedia Britannica</em>"<em> </em>one
 finds, as the last word of science, that the antiquity of man
 is allowed to stretch <em>only over </em>"tens of thou-</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 71 SCIENTIFIC SELF-COMPLACENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 sands of years."* It becomes evident that as these figures
 may be made to fluctuate between 10,000 and 100,000, therefore
 they mean very little if anything, and only render still denser
 the darkness surrounding the question. Moreover, what matters
 it that science places the birth of man in the "pre- or post-glacial
 drift," if we are told at the same time that the so-called
 "ice age" is simply a long succession of ages which
 "shaded without abrupt change of any kind into what is termed
 the human or Recent period . . . the overlapping of geological
 periods having been the rule from the beginning of time."
 The latter "rule" only results in the still more puzzling,
 even if strictly <em>scientific </em>and correct, information,
 that "even to-day man is contemporary with the ice-age in
 the Alpine valleys and in the Finmark."**
 </p><p>
 Thus, had it not been for the lessons taught by the <em>Secret
 Doctrine, </em>and even by exoteric Hinduism and its traditions,
 we should be left to this day to float in perplexed uncertainty
 between the indefinite ages of one school of science, the "tens
 of thousands" of years of the other, and the 6,000 years
 of the Bible interpreters. This is one of the several reasons
 why, with all the respect due to the conclusions of the men of
 learning of our modern day, we are forced to ignore them in all
 such questions of pre-historic antiquity.
 </p><p>
 Modern Geology and Anthropology must, of course, disagree with
 our views. But Occultism will find as many weapons against these
 two sciences as it has against astronomical and physical theories,
 in spite of Mr. Laing's assurances that*** "in (chronological)
 calculations of this sort, concerning older and later formations,
 there is no <em>theory, </em>and they are based on positive <em>facts,
 </em>limited only by a certain possible (?) amount of error either
 way," occultism will prove, scientific confessions in hand,
 that geology is very much in error, and very often even more so
 than Astronomy. In this very passage by Mr. Laing, which gives
 to Geology pre-eminence for correctness over Astronomy, we find
 a passage in flagrant contradiction to the admissions of the best
 Geologists themselves. Says the author --
 </p><p>
 "In short, the conclusions of Geology, at any rate up to
 the Silurian period,**** when the present order of things was
 fairly inaugurated, are approximate (truly so) <em>facts </em>and
 not <em>theories, </em>while the astronomical conclusions are
 <em>theories </em>based on <em>data so uncertain, </em>that while
 in some
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <em>See</em> article<em> </em>"<em>Geology,</em>"<em>
 </em>in<em> </em>"<em>Encyclopaedia Britannica.</em>"
 </p><p>
 ** This allows a chance even to the Biblical "Adam Chronology"
 of 6,000 years. (<em>Ibid.</em>)
 </p><p>
 *** See his "<em>Modern Science and Modern Thought.</em>"
 </p><p>
 **** To the Silurian period as regards Molluscs and Animal life
 -- granted; but what do they know of man?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 72 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 cases they give results incredibly short . . . in others they
 give results almost incredibly long."
 </p><p>
 After which, the reader is advised that the safest course "seems
 to be to <em>assume </em>that Geology really proves the <em>duration
 of the present order of things </em>to have been somewhere over
 100 millions of years," as "Astronomy gives an enormous
 though unknown time in the past, and to come in the future, for
 the birth, growth, maturity, decline, and death of the Solar System,
 of which our Earth is a small planet now passing through the habitable
 phase." (p. 49.)
 </p><p>
 Judging from past experience, we do not entertain the slightest
 doubt that, once called upon to answer "the absurd unscientific
 and preposterous claims of exoteric (and esoteric) Aryan chronology,"
 the scientist of "the results incredibly short," <em>i.e.</em>,
 only 15,000,000 years, and the scientist, who "would require
 600,000,000 years," together with those who accept Mr. Huxley's
 figures of 1,000,000,000 "since sedimentation began in Europe"
 (<em>World Life</em>)<em>, </em>would all be as dogmatic one as
 the other. Nor would they fail to remind the Occultist and the
 Brahmin, that it is the modern men of science alone who represent
 exact science, whose duty it is to fight <em>inaccuracy</em> and<em>
 superstition.</em> 
 </p><p>
 The earth is passing through the "habitable phase" only
 for the <em>present order </em>of things, and as far as our present
 mankind is concerned with its actual "coats of skin"
 and phosphorus for bones and brain.
 </p><p>
 We are ready to concede the 100 millions of years offered by Geology,
 since we are taught that our present physical mankind -- or the
 <em>Vaivasvata</em> humanity -- began only 18 millions of years
 ago. But Geology has no facts to give us for the duration of geological
 periods, as we have shown, no more indeed than has Astronomy.
 The authentic letter from Mr. W. Pengelly, <strong>F.R.S</strong>.,
 quoted elsewhere, says that: "It is at present, and perhaps
 always will be, <strong>IMPOSSIBLE </strong>to reduce, even approximately,
 geological time into years or even into millenniums." And
 having never, hitherto, excavated a fossil man of any other than
 the <em>present form -- </em>what does Geology know of him? It
 has traced zones or strata and, with these, primordial zoological
 life, down to the Silurian. When it has, in the same way, traced
 man down to his primordial protoplasmic form, then we will admit
 that it may know something of primordial man. If it is not very
 material "to the bearings of modern scientific discovery
 on modern thought," whether "man has existed in state
 of constant though slow progression for the last 50,000 years
 of period of 15 millions, or for the last 500,000 years of a period
 of 150 millions" ("Modern Science, etc." p. 49),
 as Mr. S. Laing tells his readers, it is very much so for the
 claims of the Occultists. Unless the latter show that it is a<em>
 possibility, </em>if not a perfect certainty, that man</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 73 COSMOGONY, AN INTELLIGENT PLAN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 lived 18 millions of years ago, the Secret Doctrine might as well
 have remained unwritten. An attempt must, therefore, be made in
 this direction, and it is our modern geologists and men of science
 generally who will be brought to testify to this fact in the third
 part of this volume. Meanwhile, and notwithstanding the fact that
 Hindu Chronology is constantly represented by the Orientalists
 as a fiction based on no "<em>actual</em> computation,"*
 but simply a "childish boasting," it is nevertbeless
 often twisted out of recognition to make it yield to, and fit
 in with, Western theories. No figures have ever been more meddled
 with and tortured than the famous 4, <em>3, 2, </em>followed by
 cyphers of the Yugas and Maha-Yugas.
 </p><p>
 As the whole cycle of prehistoric events, such as the evolution
 and transformation of Races and the extreme antiquity of man,
 hangs upon the said Chronology, it becomes extremely important
 to check it by other existing calculations. If the Eastern Chronology
 is rejected, we shall at least have the consolation of proving
 that no other -- whether the figures of Science or of the Churches
 -- is one whit more reliable. As Professor Max Muller expresses
 it, it is often as useful to prove what a thing is not as to show
 what it may be. And once we succeed in pointing out the fallacies
 of both Christian and scientific computations -- by allowing them
 a fair chance of comparison with our Chronology -- neither of
 the two will have a reasonable ground to stand upon, in pronouncing
 the esoteric figures less reliable than its own.
 </p><p>
 We may here refer the reader to our earlier work "<em>Isis
 Unveiled,</em>"<em> </em>Vol. I., p. 32, for some remarks
 concerning the figures which were cited a few pages back.
 </p><p>
 To-day a few more facts may be added to the information there
 given, which is already known to every Orientalist. The sacredness
 of the cycle of 4320, with additional cyphers, lies in the fact
 that the figures which compose it, taken separately or joined
 in various combinations, are each and all symbolical of the greatest
 mysteries in Nature. Indeed, whether one takes the 4 separately,
 or the 3 by itself, or the two together making 7, or again the
 three added together and yielding 9, all these numbers have their
 application in the most sacred and occult things, and record the
 workings of Nature in her eternally periodical phenomena. They
 are never erring, perpetually recurring numbers, unveiling, to
 him who studies the secrets of Nature, a truly divine System,
 an <em>intelligent </em>plan in Cosmogony, which results in natural
 cosmic divisions of times, seasons, invisible influences, astronomical
 phenomena, with their action and reaction on terrestrial and even
 moral nature; on
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Wilson's "Translation of Vishnu Purana," Vol. I.,
 pp. <em>50, 51.</em><i> </i></p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 74 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 birth, death, and growth, on health and disease. All these natural
 events are based and depend upon cyclical processes in the Kosmos
 itself, producing periodic agencies which, acting from without,
 affect the Earth and all that lives and breathes on it, from one
 end to the other of any Manvantara. Causes and effects are esoteric,
 exoteric, and <em>endexoteric, </em>so to say.
 </p><p>
 In<em> Isis Unveiled </em>we wrote that which we now repeat: --
 "<em>We are at the bottom of a cycle and evidently in a transitory
 state. </em>Plato divides the intellectual progress of the universe
 during every cycle into fertile and barren periods. In the sublunary
 regions, the spheres of the various elements remain eternally
 in perfect harmony with the divine nature, he says; 'but their
 parts,' owing to a too close proximity to earth, and their commingling
 with the <em>earthly </em>(which is matter, and therefore the
 realm of evil), 'are sometimes according, and sometimes contrary
 to (divine) nature.' When those circulations -- which Eliphas
 Levi calls ' currents of the astral light' -- in the universal
 ether which contains in itself every element, take place in harmony
 with the divine spirit, our earth and everything pertaining to
 it enjoys a fertile period. The occult powers of plants, animals,
 and minerals magically sympathize with the ' superior natures,'
 and the divine soul of man is in perfect intelligence with these
 'inferior' ones. But during the barren periods, the latter lose
 their magic sympathy, and the spiritual sight of the majority
 of mankind is so blinded as to lose every notion of the superior
 powers of its own divine spirit. We are in a barren period: the
 eighteenth century, during which the malignant fever of scepticism
 broke out so irrepressibly, has entailed unbelief as an hereditary
 disease upon the nineteenth. The divine intellect is veiled in
 man; his animal brain alone<em> philosophizes.</em>"<em>
 </em>And philosophizing alone, how can it understand the "<strong>S</strong>OUL
 <strong>D</strong>OCTRINE"?
 </p><p>
 In order not to break the thread of the narrative we shall give
 some striking proofs of these cyclic laws in Part II., proceeding
 meanwhile with our explanations of geological and racial cycles.
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-04.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>